　　

　　CRIME AND PUNISHMENT

　　by Fyodor Dostoevsky

　　translated by Constance Garnett

　　PART ONE

　　Chapter One

　　ON AN exceptionally hot evening early in July a young man came outof the garret in which he lodged in S. Place and walked slowly, asthough in hesitation, towards K. bridge.

　　He had successfully avoided meeting his landlady on the staircase.His garret was under the roof of a high, five-storied house and wasmore like a cupboard than a room. The landlady who provided him withgarret, dinners, and attendance, lived on the floor below, and everytime he went out he was obliged to pass her kitchen, the door of whichinvariably stood open. And each time he passed, the young man had asick, frightened feeling, which made him scowl and feel ashamed. Hewas hopelessly in debt to his landlady, and was afraid of meeting her.

　　This was not because he was cowardly and abject, quite the contrary;but for some time past he had been in an overstrained irritablecondition, verging on hypochondria. He had become so completelyabsorbed in himself, and isolated from his fellows that he dreadedmeeting, not only his landlady, but any one at all. He was crushedby poverty, but the anxieties of his position had of late ceased toweigh upon him. He had given up attending to matters of practicalimportance; he had lost all desire to do so. Nothing that any landladycould do had a real terror for him. But to be stopped on the stairs,to be forced to listen to her trivial, irrelevant gossip, to pesteringdemands for payment, threats and complaints, and to rack his brainsfor excuses, to prevaricate, to lie- no, rather than that, he wouldcreep down the stairs like a cat and slip out unseen.

　　This evening, however, on coming out into the street, he becameacutely aware of his fears.

　　"I want to attempt a thing like that and am frightened by thesetrifles," he thought, with an odd smile. "Hm... yes, all is in a man'shands and he lets it all slip from cowardice, that's an axiom. Itwould be interesting to know what it is men are most afraid of. Takinga new step, uttering a new word is what they fear most.... But I amtalking too much. It's because I chatter that I do nothing. Or perhapsit is that I chatter because I do nothing. I've learned to chatterthis last month, lying for days together in my den thinking... of Jackthe Giant-killer. Why am I going there now? Am I capable of that? Isthat serious? It is not serious at all. It's simply a fantasy to amusemyself; a plaything! Yes, maybe it is a plaything."

　　The heat in the street was terrible: and the airlessness, the bustleand the plaster, scaffolding, bricks, and dust all about him, and thatspecial Petersburg stench, so familiar to all who are unable to getout of town in summer- all worked painfully upon the young man'salready overwrought nerves. The insufferable stench from thepot-houses, which are particularly numerous in that part of thetown, and the drunken men whom he met continually, although it was aworking day, completed the revolting misery of the picture. Anexpression of the profoundest disgust gleamed for a moment in theyoung man's refined face. He was, by the way, exceptionallyhandsome, above the average in height, slim, well-built, withbeautiful dark eyes and dark brown hair. Soon he sank into deepthought, or more accurately speaking into a complete blankness ofmind; he walked along not observing what was about him and notcaring to observe it. From time to time, he would mutter something,from the habit of talking to himself, to which he had justconfessed. At these moments he would become conscious that his ideaswere sometimes in a tangle and that he was very weak; for two dayshe had scarcely tasted food.

　　He was so badly dressed that even a man accustomed to shabbinesswould have been ashamed to be seen in the street in such rags. In thatquarter of the town, however, scarcely any shortcoming in dresswould have created surprise. Owing to the proximity of the Hay Market,the number of establishments of bad character, the preponderance ofthe trading and working class population crowded in these streetsand alleys in the heart of Petersburg, types so various were to beseen in the streets that no figure, however queer, would have causedsurprise. But there was such accumulated bitterness and contempt inthe young man's heart, that, in spite of all the fastidiousness ofyouth, he minded his rags least of all in the street. It was adifferent matter when he met with acquaintances or with formerfellow students, whom, indeed, he disliked meeting at any time. Andyet when a drunken man who, for some unknown reason, was being takensomewhere in a huge waggon dragged by a heavy dray horse, suddenlyshouted at him as he drove past: "Hey there, German hatter" bawling atthe top of his voice and pointing at him- the young man stoppedsuddenly and clutched tremulously at his hat. It was a tall roundhat from Zimmerman's, but completely worn out, rusty with age, alltorn and bespattered, brimless and bent on one side in a most unseemlyfashion. Not shame, however, but quite another feeling akin toterror had overtaken him.

　　"I knew it," he muttered in confusion, "I thought so! That's theworst of all! Why, a stupid thing like this, the most trivial detailmight spoil the whole plan. Yes, my hat is too noticeable.... It looksabsurd and that makes it noticeable.... With my rags I ought to wear acap, any sort of old pancake, but not this grotesque thing. Nobodywears such a hat, it would be noticed a mile off, it would beremembered.... What matters is that people would remember it, and thatwould give them a clue. For this business one should be as littleconspicuous as possible.... Trifles, trifles are what matter! Why,it's just such trifles that always ruin everything...."

　　He had not far to go; he knew indeed how many steps it was fromthe gate of his lodging house: exactly seven hundred and thirty. Hehad counted them once when he had been lost in dreams. At the timehe had put no faith in those dreams and was only tantalising himselfby their hideous but daring recklessness. Now, a month later, he hadbegun to look upon them differently, and, in spite of the monologuesin which he jeered at his own impotence and indecision, he hadinvoluntarily come to regard this "hideous" dream as an exploit tobe attempted, although he still did not realise this himself. He waspositively going now for a "rehearsal" of his project, and at everystep his excitement grew more and more violent.

　　With a sinking heart and a nervous tremor, he went up to a hugehouse which on one side looked on to the canal, and on the otherinto the street. This house was let out in tiny tenements and wasinhabited by working people of all kinds- tailors, locksmiths,cooks, Germans of sorts, girls picking up a living as best they could,petty clerks, &c. There was a continual coming and going through thetwo gates and in the two courtyards of the house. Three or fourdoor-keepers were employed on the building. The young man was veryglad to meet none of them, and at once slipped unnoticed through thedoor on the right, and up the staircase. It was a back staircase, darkand narrow, but he was familiar with it already, and knew his way, andhe liked all these surroundings: in such darkness even the mostinquisitive eyes were not to be dreaded.

　　"If I am so scared now, what would it be if it somehow came topass that I were really going to do it?" he could not help askinghimself as he reached the fourth storey. There his progress was barredby some porters who were engaged in moving furniture out of a flat. Heknew that the flat had been occupied by a German clerk in the civilservice, and his family. This German was moving out then, and so thefourth floor on this staircase would be untenanted except by the oldwoman. "That's a good thing anyway," he thought to himself, as he rangthe bell of the old woman's flat. The bell gave a faint tinkle asthough it were made of tin and not of copper. The little flats in suchhouses always have bells that ring like that. He had forgotten thenote of that bell, and now its peculiar tinkle seemed to remind him ofsomething and to bring it clearly before him.... He started, hisnerves were terribly overstrained by now. In a little while, thedoor was opened a tiny crack: the old woman eyed her visitor withevident distrust through the crack, and nothing could be seen buther little eyes, glittering in the darkness. But, seeing a number ofpeople on the landing, she grew bolder, and opened the door wide.The young man stepped into the dark entry, which was partitioned offfrom the tiny kitchen. The old woman stood facing him in silence andlooking inquiringly at him. She was a diminutive, withered up oldwoman of sixty, with sharp malignant eyes and a sharp little nose. Hercolourless, somewhat grizzled hair was thickly smeared with oil, andshe wore no kerchief over it. Round her thin long neck, which lookedlike a hen's leg, was knotted some sort of flannel rag, and, inspite of the heat, there hung flapping on her shoulders, a mangy furcape, yellow with age. The old woman coughed and groaned at everyinstant. The young man must have looked at her with a ratherpeculiar expression, for a gleam of mistrust came into her eyes again.

　　"Raskolnikov, a student, I came here a month ago," the young manmade haste to mutter, with a half bow, remembering that he ought to bemore polite.

　　"I remember, my good sir, I remember quite well your coming here,"the old woman said distinctly, still keeping her inquiring eyes on hisface.

　　"And here... I am again on the same errand," Raskolnikovcontinued, a little disconcerted and surprised at the old woman'smistrust. "Perhaps she is always like that though, only I did notnotice it the other time," he thought with an uneasy feeling.

　　The old woman paused, as though hesitating; then stepped on oneside, and pointing to the door of the room, she said, letting hervisitor pass in front of her:

　　"Step in, my good sir."

　　The little room into which the young man walked, with yellow paperon the walls, geraniums and muslin curtains in the windows, wasbrightly lighted up at that moment by the setting sun.

　　"So the sun will shine like this then too!" flashed as it were bychance through Raskolnikov's mind, and with a rapid glance hescanned everything in the room, trying as far as possible to noticeand remember its arrangement. But there was nothing special in theroom. The furniture, all very old and of yellow wood, consisted of asofa with a huge bent wooden back, an oval table in front of the sofa,a dressing-table with a looking-glass fixed on it between the windows,chairs along the walls and two or three half-penny prints in yellowframes, representing German damsels with birds in their hands- thatwas all. In the corner a light was burning before a small ikon.Everything was very clean; the floor and the furniture were brightlypolished; everything shone.

　　"Lizaveta's work," thought the young man. There was not a speck ofdust to be seen in the whole flat.

　　"It's in the houses of spiteful old widows that one finds suchcleanliness," Raskolnikov thought again, and he stole a curious glanceat the cotton curtain over the door leading into another tiny room, inwhich stood the old woman's bed and chest of drawers and into which hehad never looked before. These two rooms made up the whole flat.

　　"What do you want?" the old woman said severely, coming into theroom and, as before, standing in front of him so as to look himstraight in the face.

　　"I've brought something to pawn here," and he drew out of his pocketan old-fashioned flat silver watch, on the back of which wasengraved a globe; the chain was of steel.

　　"But the time is up for your last pledge. The month was up the daybefore yesterday."

　　"I will bring you the interest for another month; wait a little."

　　"But that's for me to do as I please, my good sir, to wait or tosell your pledge at once."

　　"How much will you give me for the watch, Alyona Ivanovna?"

　　"You come with such trifles, my good sir, it's scarcely worthanything. I gave you two roubles last time for your ring and one couldbuy it quite new at a jeweler's for a rouble and a half."

　　"Give me four roubles for it, I shall redeem it, it was my father's.I shall be getting some money soon."

　　"A rouble and a half, and interest in advance, if you like!"

　　"A rouble and a half!" cried the young man.

　　"Please yourself"- and the old woman handed him back the watch.The young man took it, and was so angry that he was on the point ofgoing away; but checked himself at once, remembering that there wasnowhere else he could go, and that he had had another object also incoming.

　　"Hand it over," he said roughly.

　　The old woman fumbled in her pocket for her keys, and disappearedbehind the curtain into the other room. The young man, left standingalone in the middle of the room, listened inquisitively, thinking.He could hear her unlocking the chest of drawers.

　　"It must be the top drawer," he reflected. "So she carries thekeys in a pocket on the right. All in one bunch on a steel ring....And there's one key there, three times as big as all the others,with deep notches; that can't be the key of the chest of drawers...then there must be some other chest or strong-box... that's worthknowing. Strong-boxes always have keys like that... but howdegrading it all is."

　　The old woman came back.

　　"Here, sir: as we say ten copecks the rouble a month, so I must takefifteen copecks from a rouble and a half for the month in advance. Butfor the two roubles I lent you before, you owe me now twenty copeckson the same reckoning in advance. That makes thirty-five copecksaltogether. So I must give you a rouble and fifteen copecks for thewatch. Here it is."

　　"What! only a rouble and fifteen copecks now!"

　　"Just so."

　　The young man did not dispute it and took the money. He looked atthe old woman, and was in no hurry to get away, as though there wasstill something he wanted to say or to do, but he did not himselfquite know what.

　　"I may be bringing you something else in a day or two, AlyonaIvanovna- a valuable thing- silver- a cigarette box, as soon as Iget it back from a friend..." he broke off in confusion.

　　"Well, we will talk about it then, sir."

　　"Good-bye- are you always at home alone, your sister is not herewith you?" He asked her as casually as possible as he went out intothe passage.

　　"What business is she of yours, my good sir?"

　　"Oh, nothing particular, I simply asked. You are too quick....Good-day, Alyona Ivanovna."

　　Raskolnikov went out in complete confusion. This confusion becamemore and more intense. As he went down the stairs, he even stoppedshort, two or three times, as though suddenly struck by somethought. When he was in the street he cried out, "Oh, God, howloathsome it all is! and can I, can I possibly.... No, it'snonsense, it's rubbish!" he added resolutely. "And how could such anatrocious thing come into my head? What filthy things my heart iscapable of. Yes, filthy above all, disgusting, loathsome,loathsome!- and for a whole month I've been...." But no words, noexclamations, could express his agitation. The feeling of intenserepulsion, which had begun to oppress and torture his heart while hewas on his way to the old woman, had by now reached such a pitch andhad taken such a definite form that he did not know what to do withhimself to escape from his wretchedness. He walked along thepavement like a drunken man, regardless of the passers-by, andjostling against them, and only came to his senses when he was inthe next street. Looking round, he noticed that he was standingclose to a tavern which was entered by steps leading from the pavementto the basement. At that instant two drunken men came out at the door,and abusing and supporting one another, they mounted the steps.Without stopping to think, Raskolnikov went down the steps at once.Till that moment he had never been into a tavern, but now he feltgiddy and was tormented by a burning thirst. He longed for a drinkof cold beer, and attributed his sudden weakness to the want offood. He sat down at a sticky little table in a dark and dirty corner;ordered some beer, and eagerly drank off the first glassful. At oncehe felt easier; and his thoughts became clear.

　　"All that's nonsense," he said hopefully, "and there is nothing init all to worry about! It's simply physical derangement. Just aglass of beer, a piece of dry bread- and in one moment the brain isstronger, the mind is clearer and the will is firm! Phew, howutterly petty it all is!"

　　But in spite of this scornful reflection, he was by now lookingcheerful as though he were suddenly set free from a terrible burden:and he gazed round in a friendly way at the people in the room. Buteven at that moment he had a dim foreboding that this happier frame ofmind was also not normal.

　　There were few people at the time in the tavern. Besides the twodrunken men he had met on the steps, a group consisting of aboutfive men and a girl with a concertina had gone out at the same time.Their departure left the room quiet and rather empty. The personsstill in the tavern were a man who appeared to be an artisan, drunk,but not extremely so, sitting before a pot of beer, and his companion,a huge, stout man with a grey beard, in a short full-skirted coat.He was very drunk: and had dropped asleep on the bench; every nowand then, he began as though in his sleep, cracking his fingers,with his arms wide apart and the upper part of his body bounding abouton the bench, while he hummed some meaningless refrain, trying torecall some such lines as these:-

　　"His wife a year he fondly loved

　　His wife a- a year he- fondly loved."-

　　Or suddenly waking up again:-

　　"Walking along the crowded row

　　He met the one he used to know."-

　　But no one shared his enjoyment: his silent companion looked withpositive hostility and mistrust at all these manifestations. There wasanother man in the room who looked somewhat like a retiredgovernment clerk. He was sitting apart, now and then sipping fromhis pot and looking round at the company. He, too, appeared to be insome agitation.

　　Chapter Two

　　RASKOLNIKOV was not used to crowds, and, as we said before, heavoided society of every sort, more especially of late. But now all atonce he felt a desire to be with other people. Something new seemed tobe taking place within him, and with it he felt a sort of thirst forcompany. He was so weary after a whole month of concentratedwretchedness and gloomy excitement that he longed to rest, if only fora moment, in some other world, whatever it might be; and, in spiteof the filthiness of the surroundings, he was glad now to stay inthe tavern.

　　The master of the establishment was in another room, but hefrequently came down some steps into the main room, his jaunty, tarredboots with red turn-over tops coming into view each time before therest of his person. He wore a full coat and a horribly greasy blacksatin waistcoat, with no cravat, and his whole face seemed smearedwith oil like an iron lock. At the counter stood a boy of aboutfourteen, and there was another boy somewhat younger who handedwhatever was wanted. On the counter lay some sliced cucumber, somepieces of dried black bread, and some fish, chopped up small, allsmelling very bad. It was insufferably close, and so heavy with thefumes of spirits that five minutes in such an atmosphere might wellmake a man drunk.

　　There are chance meetings with strangers that interest us from thefirst moment, before a word is spoken. Such was the impression made onRaskolnikov by the person sitting a little distance from him, wholooked like a retired clerk. The young man often recalled thisimpression afterwards, and even ascribed it to presentiment. He lookedrepeatedly at the clerk, partly no doubt because the latter wasstaring persistently at him, obviously anxious to enter intoconversation. At the other persons in the room, including thetavern-keeper, the clerk looked as though he were used to theircompany, and weary of it, showing a shade of condescending contemptfor them as persons of station and culture inferior to his own, withwhom it would be useless for him to converse. He was a man over fifty,bald and grizzled, of medium height, and stoutly built. His face,bloated from continual drinking, was of a yellow, even greenish,tinge, with swollen eyelids out of which keen reddish eyes gleamedlike little chinks. But there was something very strange in him; therewas a light in his eyes as though of intense feeling- perhaps therewere even thought and intelligence, but at the same time there was agleam of something like madness. He was wearing an old andhopelessly ragged black dress coat, with all its buttons missingexcept one, and that one he had buttoned, evidently clinging to thislast trace of respectability. A crumpled shirt front covered withspots and stains, protruded from his canvas waistcoat. Like a clerk,he wore no beard, nor moustache, but had been so long unshaven thathis chin looked like a stiff greyish brush. And there was somethingrespectable and like an official about his manner too. But he wasrestless; he ruffled up his hair and from time to time let his headdrop into his hands dejectedly resting his ragged elbows on thestained and sticky table. At last he looked straight at Raskolnikov,and said loudly and resolutely:

　　"May I venture, honoured sir, to engage you in politeconversation? Forasmuch as, though your exterior would not commandrespect, my experience admonishes me that you are a man of educationand not accustomed to drinking. I have always respected education whenin conjunction with genuine sentiments, and I am besides a titularcounsellor in rank. Marmeladov- such is my name; titular counsellor. Imake bold to inquire- have you been in the service?"

　　"No, I am studying," answered the young man, somewhat surprised atthe grandiloquent style of the speaker and also at being so directlyaddressed. In spite of the momentary desire he had just been feelingfor company of any sort, on being actually spoken to he feltimmediately his habitual irritable and uneasy aversion for anystranger who approached or attempted to approach him.

　　"A student then, or formerly a student," cried the clerk. "Just whatI thought! I'm a man of experience, immense experience, sir," and hetapped his forehead with his fingers in self-approval. "You've beena student or have attended some learned institution!... But allowme...." He got up, staggered, took up his jug and glass, and satdown beside the young man, facing him a little sideways. He was drunk,but spoke fluently and boldly, only occasionally losing the threadof his sentences and drawling his words. He pounced upon Raskolnikovas greedily as though he too had not spoken to a soul for a month.

　　"Honoured sir," he began almost with solemnity, "poverty is not avice, that's a true saying. Yet I know too that drunkenness is not avirtue, and that that's even truer. But beggary, honoured sir, beggaryis a vice. In poverty you may still retain your innate nobility ofsoul, but in beggary- never- no one. For beggary a man is not chasedout of human society with a stick, he is swept out with a broom, so asto make it as humiliating as possible; and quite right, too, forasmuchas in beggary I am ready to be the first to humiliate myself. Hencethe pot-house! Honoured sir, a month ago Mr. Lebeziatnikov gave mywife a beating, and my wife is a very different matter from me! Do youunderstand? Allow me to ask you another question out of simplecuriosity: have you ever spent a night on a hay barge, on the Neva?"

　　"No, I have not happened to," answered Raskolnikov. "What do youmean?"

　　"Well, I've just come from one and it's the fifth night I've sleptso...." He filled his glass, emptied it and paused. Bits of hay werein fact clinging to his clothes and sticking to his hair. It seemedquite probable that he had not undressed or washed for the last fivedays. His hands, particularly, were filthy. They were fat and red,with black nails.

　　His conversation seemed to excite a general though languid interest.The boys at the counter fell to sniggering. The innkeeper came downfrom the upper room, apparently on purpose to listen to the "funnyfellow" and sat down at a little distance, yawning lazily, but withdignity. Evidently Marmeladov was a familiar figure here, and he hadmost likely acquired his weakness for high-flown speeches from thehabit of frequently entering into conversation with strangers of allsorts in the tavern. This habit develops into a necessity in somedrunkards, and especially in those who are looked after sharply andkept in order at home. Hence in the company of other drinkers they tryto justify themselves and even if possible obtain consideration.

　　"Funny fellow!" pronounced the innkeeper. "And why don't you work,why aren't you at your duty, if you are in the service?"

　　"Why am I not at my duty, honoured sir," Marmeladov went on,addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov, as though it had beenhe who put that question to him. "Why am I not at my duty? Does not myheart ache to think what a useless worm I am? A month ago when Mr.Lebeziatnikov beat my wife with his own hands, and I lay drunk, didn'tI suffer? Excuse me, young man, has it ever happened to you... hm...well, to petition hopelessly for a loan?"

　　"Yes, it has. But what do you mean by hopelessly?"

　　"Hopelessly in the fullest sense, when you know beforehand thatyou will get nothing by it. You know, for instance, beforehand withpositive certainty that this man, this most reputable and exemplarycitizen, will on no consideration give you money; and indeed I ask youwhy should he? For he knows of course that I shan't pay it back.From compassion? But Mr. Lebeziatnikov who keeps up with modernideas explained the other day that compassion is forbidden nowadays byscience itself, and that that's what is done now in England, wherethere is political economy. Why, I ask you, should he give it to me?And yet though I know beforehand that he won't, I set off to himand..."

　　"Why do you go?" put in Raskolnikov.

　　"Well, when one has no one, nowhere else one can go! For every manmust have somewhere to go. Since there are times when one absolutelymust go somewhere! When my own daughter first went out with a yellowticket, then I had to go... (for my daughter has a yellowpassport)," he added in parenthesis, looking with a certain uneasinessat the young man. "No matter, sir, no matter!" he went on hurriedlyand with apparent composure when both the boys at the counter guffawedand even the innkeeper smiled- "No matter, I am not confounded bythe wagging of their heads; for every one knows everything about italready, and all that is secret is made open. And I accept it all, notwith contempt, but with humility. So be it! So be it! 'Behold theman!' Excuse me, young man, can you.... No, to put it more stronglyand more distinctly; not can you but dare you, looking upon me, assertthat I am not a pig?"

　　The young man did not answer a word.

　　"Well," the orator began again stolidly and with even increaseddignity, after waiting for the laughter in the room to subside. "Well,so be it, I am a pig, but she is a lady! I have the semblance of abeast, but Katerina Ivanovna, my spouse, is a person of educationand an officer's daughter. Granted, granted, I am a scoundrel, but sheis a woman of a noble heart, full of sentiments, refined by education.And yet... oh, if only she felt for me! Honoured sir, honoured sir,you know every man ought to have at least one place where peoplefeel for him! But Katerina Ivanovna, though she is magnanimous, she isunjust.... And yet, although I realise that when she pulls my hair sheonly does it out of pity- for I repeat without being ashamed, shepulls my hair, young man," he declared with redoubled dignity, hearingthe sniggering again- "but, my God, if she would but once.... Butno, no! It's all in vain and it's no use talking! No use talking!For more than once, my wish did come true and more than once she hasfelt for me but... such is my fate and I am a beast by nature!"

　　"Rather!" assented the innkeeper yawning. Marmeladov struck his fistresolutely on the table.

　　"Such is my fate! Do you know, sir, do you know, I have sold hervery stockings for drink? Not her shoes- that would be more or less inthe order of things, but her stockings, her stockings I have soldfor drink! Her mohair shawl I sold for drink, a present to her longago, her own property, not mine; and we live in a cold room and shecaught cold this winter and has begun coughing and spitting blood too.We have three little children and Katerina Ivanovna is at work frommorning till night; she is scrubbing and cleaning and washing thechildren, for she's been used to cleanliness from a child. But herchest is weak and she has a tendency to consumption and I feel it!Do you suppose I don't feel it? And the more I drink the more I feelit. That's why I drink too. I try to find sympathy and feeling indrink.... I drink so that I may suffer twice as much!" And as thoughin despair he laid his head down on the table.

　　"Young man," he went on, raising his head again, "in your face Iseem to read some trouble of mind. When you came in I read it, andthat was why I addressed you at once. For in unfolding to you thestory of my life, I do not wish to make myself a laughing-stock beforethese idle listeners, who indeed know all about it already, but I amlooking for a man of feeling and education. Know then that my wife waseducated in a high-class school for the daughters of noblemen, andon leaving she danced the shawl dance before the governor and otherpersonages for which she was presented with a gold medal and acertificate of merit. The medal... well, the medal of course was sold-long ago, hm... but the certificate of merit is in her trunk still andnot long ago she showed it to our landlady. And although she is mostcontinually on bad terms with the landlady, yet she wanted to tellsome one or other of her past honours and of the happy days that aregone. I don't condemn her for it, I don't blame her, for the one thingleft her is recollection of the past, and all the rest is dust andashes. Yes, yes, she is a lady of spirit, proud and determined. Shescrubs the floors herself and has nothing but black bread to eat,but won't allow herself to be treated with disrespect. That's whyshe would not overlook Mr. Lebeziatnikov's rudeness to her, and sowhen he gave her a beating for it, she took to her bed more from thehurt to her feelings than from the blows. She was a widow when Imarried her, with three children, one smaller than the other. Shemarried her first husband, an infantry officer, for love, and ran awaywith him from her father's house. She was exceedingly fond of herhusband; but he gave way to cards, got into trouble and with that hedied. He used to beat her at the end: and although she paid himback, of which I have authentic documentary evidence, to this dayshe speaks of him with tears and she throws him up to me; and I amglad, I am glad that, though only in imagination, she should thinkof herself as having once been happy.... And she was left at his deathwith three children in a wild and remote district where I happenedto be at the time; and she was left in such hopeless poverty that,although I have seen many ups and downs of all sort, I don't feelequal to describing it even. Her relations had all thrown her off. Andshe was proud, too, excessively proud.... And then, honoured sir,and then, I, being at the time a widower, with a daughter offourteen left me by my first wife, offered her my hand, for I couldnot bear the sight of such suffering. You can judge the extremity ofher calamities, that she, a woman of education and culture anddistinguished family, should have consented to be my wife. But shedid! Weeping and sobbing and wringing her hands, she married me! Forshe had nowhere to turn! Do you understand, sir, do you understandwhat it means when you have absolutely nowhere to turn? No, that youdon't understand yet.... And for a whole year, I performed my dutiesconscientiously and faithfully, and did not touch this" (he tapped thejug with his finger), "for I have feelings. But even so, I could notplease her; and then I lost my place too, and that through no fault ofmine but through changes in the office; and then I did touch it!... Itwill be a year and a half ago soon since we found ourselves at lastafter many wanderings and numerous calamities in this magnificentcapital, adorned with innumerable monuments. Here I obtained asituation.... I obtained it and I lost it again. Do you understand?This time it was through my own fault I lost it: for my weakness hadcome out.... We have now part of a room at Amalia FyodorovnaLippevechsel's; and what we live upon and what we pay our rent with, Icould not say. There are a lot of people living there besidesourselves. Dirt and disorder, a perfect Bedlam... hm... yes... Andmeanwhile my daughter by my first wife has grown up; and what mydaughter has had to put up with from her step-mother whilst she wasgrowing up, I won't speak of. For, though Katerina Ivanovna is full ofgenerous feelings, she is a spirited lady, irritable andshort-tempered.... Yes. But it's no use going over that! Sonia, as youmay well fancy, has had no education. I did make an effort fouryears ago to give her a course of geography and universal history, butas I was not very well up in those subjects myself and we had nosuitable books, and what books we had... hm, any way we have noteven those now, so all our instruction came to an end. We stopped atCyrus of Persia. Since she has attained years of maturity, she hasread other books of romantic tendency and of late she had read withgreat interest a book she got through Mr. Lebeziatnikov, Lewes'Physiology- do you know it?- and even recounted extracts from it tous: and that's the whole of her education. And now may I venture toaddress you, honoured sir, on my own account with a privatequestion. Do you suppose that a respectable poor girl can earn much byhonest work? Not fifteen farthings a day can she earn, if she isrespectable and has no special talent and that without putting herwork down for an instant! And what's more, Ivan Ivanitch Klopstock thecivil counsellor- have you heard of him?- has not to this day paid herfor the half-dozen linen shirts she made him and drove her roughlyaway, stamping and reviling her, on the pretext that the shirt collarswere not made like the pattern and were put in askew. And there arethe little ones hungry.... And Katerina Ivanovna walking up and downand wringing her hands, her cheeks flushed red, as they always arein that disease: 'Here you live with us,' says she, 'you eat and drinkand are kept warm and you do nothing to help.' And much she gets toeat and drink when there is not a crust for the little ones forthree days! I was lying at the time... well, what of it! I was lyingdrunk and I heard my Sonia speaking (she is a gentle creature with asoft little voice... fair hair and such a pale, thin little face). Shesaid: 'Katerina Ivanovna, am I really to do a thing like that?' AndDarya Frantsovna, a woman of evil character and very well known to thepolice, had two or three times tried to get at her through thelandlady. 'And why not?' said Katerina Ivanovna with a jeer, 'youare something mighty precious to be so careful of!' But don't blameher, don't blame her, honoured sir, don't blame her! She was notherself when she spoke, but driven to distraction by her illness andthe crying of the hungry children; and it was said more to wound herthan anything else.... For that's Katerina Ivanovna's character, andwhen children cry, even from hunger, she falls to beating them atonce. At six o'clock I saw Sonia get up, put on her kerchief and hercape, and go out of the room and about nine o'clock she came back. Shewalked straight up to Katerina Ivanovna and she laid thirty roubles onthe table before her in silence. She did not utter a word, she did noteven look at her, she simply picked up our big green drap de damesshawl (we have a shawl, made of drap de dames), put it over her headand face and lay down on the bed with her face to the wall; only herlittle shoulders and her body kept shuddering.... And I went onlying there, just as before.... And then I saw, young man, I sawKaterina Ivanovna, in the same silence go up to Sonia's little bed;she was on her knees all the evening kissing Sonia's feet, and wouldnot get up, and then they both fell asleep in each other's arms...together, together... yes... and I... lay drunk."

　　Marmeladov stopped short, as though his voice had failed him. Thenhe hurriedly filled his glass, drank, and cleared his throat.

　　"Since then, sir," he went on after a brief pause- "Since then,owing to an unfortunate occurrence and through information given byevil-intentioned persons- in all which Darya Frantsovna took a leadingpart on the pretext that she had been treated with want of respect-since then my daughter Sofya Semyonovna has been forced to take ayellow ticket, and owing to that she is unable to go on living withus. For our landlady, Amalia Fyodorovna would not hear of it (thoughshe had backed up Darya Frantsovna before) and Mr. Lebeziatnikovtoo... hm.... All the trouble between him and Katerina Ivanovna was onSonia's account. At first he was for making up to Sonia himself andthen all of a sudden he stood on his dignity: 'how,' said he, 'can ahighly educated man like me live in the same rooms with a girl likethat?' And Katerina Ivanovna would not let it pass, she stood up forher... and so that's how it happened. And Sonia comes to us now,mostly after dark; she comforts Katerina Ivanovna and gives her allshe can.... She has a room at the Kapernaumovs, the tailors, shelodges with them; Kapernaumov is a lame man with a cleft palate andall of his numerous family have cleft palates too. And his wife,too, has a cleft palate. They all live in one room, but Sonia hasher own, partitioned off.... Hm... yes... very poor people and allwith cleft palates... yes. Then I got up in the morning, and put on myrags, lifted up my hands to heaven and set off to his excellencyIvan Afanasyevitch. His excellency Ivan Afanasyevitch, do you knowhim? No? Well, then, it's a man of God you don't know. He is wax...wax before the face of the Lord; even as wax melteth!... His eyes weredim when he heard my story. 'Marmeladov, once already you havedeceived my expectations... I'll take you once more on my ownresponsibility'- that's what he said, 'remember,' he said, 'and nowyou can go.' I kissed the dust at his feet- in thought only, for inreality he would not have allowed me to do it, being a statesman and aman of modern political and enlightened ideas. I returned home, andwhen I announced that I'd been taken back into the service andshould receive a salary, heavens, what a to-do there was...!"

　　Marmeladov stopped again in violent excitement. At that moment awhole party of revellers already drunk came in from the street, andthe sounds of a hired concertina and the cracked piping voice of achild of seven singing "The Hamlet" were heard in the entry. Theroom was filled with noise. The tavern-keeper and the boys were busywith the new-comers. Marmeladov paying no attention to the newarrivals continued his story. He appeared by now to be extremely weak,but as he became more and more drunk, he became more and moretalkative. The recollection of his recent success in getting thesituation seemed to revive him, and was positively reflected in a sortof radiance on his face. Raskolnikov listened attentively.

　　"That was five weeks ago, sir. Yes.... As soon as KaterinaIvanovna and Sonia heard of it, mercy on us, it was as though Istepped into the kingdom of Heaven. It used to be: you can lie likea beast, nothing but abuse. Now they were walking on tiptoe, hushingthe children. 'Semyon Zaharovitch is tired with his work at theoffice, he is resting, shh!' They made me coffee before I went to workand boiled cream for me! They began to get real cream for me, do youhear that? And how they managed to get together the money for a decentoutfit- eleven roubles, fifty copecks, I can't guess. Boots, cottonshirt-fronts- most magnificent, a uniform, they got up all in splendidstyle, for eleven roubles and a half. The first morning I came backfrom the office I found Katerina Ivanovna had cooked two courses fordinner- soup and salt meat with horse radish- which we had neverdreamed of till then. She had not any dresses... none at all, butshe got herself up as though she were going on a visit; and not thatshe'd anything to do it with, she smartened herself up with nothing atall, she'd done her hair nicely, put on a clean collar of some sort,cuffs, and there she was, quite a different person, she was youngerand better looking. Sonia, my little darling, had only helped withmoney 'for the time,' she said, 'it won't do for me to come and seeyou too often. After dark maybe when no one can see.' Do you hear,do you hear? I lay down for a nap after dinner and what do youthink: though Katerina Ivanovna had quarrelled to the last degree withour landlady Amalia Fyodorovna only a week before, she could notresist then asking her in to coffee. For two hours they weresitting, whispering together. 'Semyon Zaharovitch is in the serviceagain, now, and receiving a salary,' says she, 'and he went himself tohis excellency and his excellency himself came out to him, made allthe others wait and led Semyon Zaharovitch by the hand beforeeverybody into his study.' Do you hear, do you hear? 'To be sure,'says he, 'Semyon Zaharovitch, remembering your past services,' sayshe, 'and in spite of your propensity to that foolish weakness, sinceyou promise now and since moreover we've got on badly without you,'(do you hear, do you hear;) 'and so,' says he, 'I rely now on yourword as a gentleman.' And all that, let me tell you, she has simplymade up for herself, and not simply out of wantonness, for the sake ofbragging; no, she believes it all herself, she amuses herself with herown fancies, upon my word she does! And I don't blame her for it,no, I don't blame her!... Six days ago when I brought her my firstearnings in full- twenty-three roubles forty copecks altogether- shecalled me her poppet: 'poppet,' said she, 'my little poppet.' And whenwe were by ourselves, you understand? You would not think me a beauty,you would not think much of me as a husband, would you?... Well, shepinched my cheek 'my little poppet,' said she."

　　Marmeladov broke off, tried to smile, but suddenly his chin began totwitch. He controlled himself however. The tavern, the degradedappearance of the man, the five nights in the hay barge, and the potof spirits, and yet this poignant love for his wife and childrenbewildered his listener. Raskolnikov listened intently but with a sicksensation. He felt vexed that he had come here.

　　"Honoured sir, honoured sir," cried Marmeladov recovering himself-"Oh, sir, perhaps all this seems a laughing matter to you, as itdoes to others, and perhaps I am only worrying you with thestupidity of all the trivial details of my home life, but it is nota laughing matter to me. For I can feel it all.... And the whole ofthat heavenly day of my life and the whole of that evening I passed infleeting dreams of how I would arrange it all, and how I would dressall the children, and how I should give her rest, and how I shouldrescue my own daughter from dishonour and restore her to the bosomof her family.... And a great deal more.... Quite excusable, sir.Well, then, sir (Marmeladov suddenly gave a sort of start, raisedhis head and gazed intently at his listener) well, on the very nextday after all those dreams, that is to say, exactly five days ago,in the evening, by a cunning trick, like a thief in the night, I stolefrom Katerina Ivanovna the key of her box, took out what was left ofmy earnings, how much it was I have forgotten, and now look at me, allof you! It's the fifth day since I left home, and they are looking forme there and it's the end of my employment, and my uniform is lying ina tavern on the Egyptian bridge. I exchanged it for the garments Ihave on... and it's the end of everything!"

　　Marmeladov struck his forehead with his fist, clenched his teeth,closed his eyes and leaned heavily with his elbow on the table. Buta minute later his face suddenly changed and with a certain assumedslyness and affectation of bravado, he glanced at Raskolnikov, laughedand said:

　　"This morning I went to see Sonia, I went to ask her for apick-me-up! He-he-he!"

　　"You don't say she gave it to you?" cried one of the new-comers;he shouted the words and went off into a guffaw.

　　"This very quart was bought with her money," Marmeladov declared,addressing himself exclusively to Raskolnikov. "Thirty copecks shegave me with her own hands, her last, all she had, as I saw.... Shesaid nothing, she only looked at me without a word.... Not on earth,but up yonder... they grieve over men, they weep, but they don't blamethem, they don't blame them! But it hurts more, it hurts more whenthey don't blame! Thirty copecks yes! And maybe she needs them now,eh? What do you think, my dear sir? For now she's got to keep up herappearance. It costs money, that smartness, that special smartness,you know? Do you understand? And there's pomatum, too, you see, shemust have things; petticoats, starched ones, shoes, too, real jauntyones to show off her foot when she has to step over a puddle. Do youunderstand, sir, do you understand what all that smartness means?And here I, her own father, here I took thirty copecks of that moneyfor a drink! And I am drinking it! And I have already drunk it!Come, who will have pity on a man like me, eh? Are you sorry for me,sir, or not? Tell me, sir, are you sorry or not? He-he-he!"

　　He would have filled his glass, but there was no drink left. The potwas empty.

　　"What are you to be pitied for?" shouted the tavern-keeper who wasagain near them.

　　Shouts of laughter and even oaths followed. The laughter and theoaths came from those who were listening and also from those who hadheard nothing but were simply looking at the figure of thedischarged government clerk.

　　"To be pitied! Why am I to be pitied?" Marmeladov suddenlydeclaimed, standing up with his arm outstretched, as though he hadbeen only waiting for that question.

　　"Why am I to be pitied, you say? Yes! there's nothing to pity mefor! I ought to be crucified, crucified on a cross, not pitied!Crucify me, oh judge, crucify me but pity me! And then I will go ofmyself to be crucified, for it's not merry-making I seek but tears andtribulation!... Do you suppose, you that sell, that this pint of yourshas been sweet to me? It was tribulation I sought at the bottom of it,tears and tribulation, and have found it, and I have tasted it; but Hewill pity us Who has had pity on all men, Who has understood all menand all things, He is the One. He too is the judge. He will come inthat day and He will ask: 'Where is the daughter who gave herselffor her cross, consumptive step-mother and for the little childrenof another? Where is the daughter who had pity upon the filthydrunkard, her earthly father, undismayed by his beastliness?' And Hewill say, 'Come to me! I have already forgiven thee once.... I haveforgiven thee once.... Thy sins which are many are forgiven thee forthou hast loved much....' And he will forgive my Sonia, He willforgive, I know it... I felt it in my heart when I was with her justnow! And He will judge and will forgive all, the good and the evil,the wise and the meek.... And when He has done with all of them,then He will summon us. 'You too come forth,' He will say, 'Come forthye drunkards, come forth, ye weak ones, come forth, ye children ofshame!' And we shall all come forth, without shame and shall standbefore him. And He will say unto us, 'Ye are swine, made in theImage of the Beast and with his mark; but come ye also!' And thewise ones and those of understanding will say, 'Oh Lord, why dost Thoureceive these men?' And He will say, 'This is why I receive them, ohye wise, this is why I receive them, oh ye of understanding, thatnot one of them believed himself to be worthy of this.' And He willhold out His hands to us and we shall fall down before him... and weshall weep... and we shall understand all things! Then we shallunderstand all!... and all will understand, Katerina Ivanovnaeven... she will understand.... Lord, Thy kingdom come!" And he sankdown on the bench exhausted, and helpless, looking at no one,apparently oblivious of his surroundings and plunged in deepthought. His words had created a certain impression; there was amoment of silence; but soon laughter and oaths were heard again.

　　"That's his notion!"

　　"Talked himself silly!"

　　"A fine clerk he is!"

　　And so on, and so on.

　　"Let us go, sir," said Marmeladov all at once, raising his headand addressing Raskolnikov- "come along with me... Kozel's house,looking into the yard. I'm going to Katerina Ivanovna- time I did."

　　Raskolnikov had for some time been wanting to go and he had meant tohelp him. Marmeladov was much unsteadier on his legs than in hisspeech and leaned heavily on the young man. They had two or threehundred paces to go. The drunken man was more and more overcome bydismay and confusion as they drew nearer the house.

　　"It's not Katerina Ivanovna I am afraid of now," he muttered inagitation- "and that she will begin pulling my hair. What does my hairmatter! Bother my hair! That's what I say! Indeed it will be better ifshe does begin pulling it, that's not what I am afraid of... it'sher eyes I am afraid of... yes, her eyes... the red on her cheeks,too, frightens me... and her breathing too.... Have you noticed howpeople in that disease breathe... when they are excited? I amfrightened of the children's crying, too.... For if Sonia has nottaken them food... I don't know what's happened! I don't know! Butblows I am not afraid of.... Know, sir, that such blows are not a painto me, but even an enjoyment. In fact I can't get on without it....It's better so. Let her strike me, it relieves her heart... it'sbetter so... There is the house. The house of Kozel, the cabinetmaker... a German, well-to-do. Lead the way!"

　　They went in from the yard and up to the fourth storey. Thestaircase got darker and darker as they went up. It was nearlyeleven o'clock and although in summer in Petersburg there is no realnight, yet it was quite dark at the top of the stairs.

　　A grimy little door at the very top of the stairs stood ajar. A verypoor-looking room about ten paces long was lighted up by a candle-end;the whole of it was visible from the entrance. It was all in disorder,littered up with rags of all sorts, especially children's garments.Across the furthest corner was stretched a ragged sheet. Behind itprobably was the bed. There was nothing in the room except twochairs and a sofa covered with American leather, full of holes, beforewhich stood an old deal kitchen-table, unpainted and uncovered. At theedge of the table stood a smoldering tallow-candle in an ironcandlestick. It appeared that the family had a room to themselves, notpart of a room, but their room was practically a passage. The doorleading to the other rooms, or rather cupboards, into which AmaliaLippevechsel's flat was divided stood half open, and there wasshouting, uproar and laughter within. People seemed to be playingcards and drinking tea there. Words of the most unceremonious kindflew out from time to time.

　　Raskolnikov recognised Katerina Ivanovna at once. She was a rathertall, slim and graceful woman, terribly emaciated, with magnificentdark brown hair and with a hectic flush in her cheeks. She waspacing up and down in her little room, pressing her hands againsther chest; her lips were parched and her breathing came in nervousbroken gasps. Her eyes glittered as in fever and looked about with aharsh immovable stare. And that consumptive and excited face withthe last flickering light of the candle-end playing upon it made asickening impression. She seemed to Raskolnikov about thirty years oldand was certainly a strange wife for Marmeladov.... She had notheard them and did not notice them coming in. She seemed to be lost inthought, hearing and seeing nothing. The room was close, but she hadnot opened the window; a stench rose from the staircase, but thedoor on to the stairs was not closed. From the inner rooms clouds oftobacco smoke floated in, she kept coughing, but did not close thedoor. The youngest child, a girl of six, was asleep, sitting curled upon the floor with her head on the sofa. A boy a year older stoodcrying and shaking in the corner, probably he had just had abeating. Beside him stood a girl of nine years old, tall and thin,wearing a thin and ragged chemise with an ancient cashmere pelisseflung over her bare shoulders, long outgrown and barely reaching herknees. Her arm, as thin as a stick, was round her brother's neck.She was trying to comfort him, whispering something to him, anddoing all she could to keep him from whimpering again. At the sametime her large dark eyes, which looked larger still from thethinness of her frightened face, were watching her mother withalarm. Marmeladov did not enter the door, but dropped on his kneesin the very doorway, pushing Raskolnikov in front of him. The womanseeing a stranger stopped indifferently facing him, coming toherself for a moment and apparently wondering what he had come for.But evidently she decided that he was going into the next room, ashe had to pass through hers to get there. Taking no further noticeof him, she walked towards the outer door to close it and uttered asudden scream on seeing her husband on his knees in the doorway.

　　"Ah!" she cried out in a frenzy, "he has come back! The criminal!the monster!... And where is the money? What's in your pocket, showme! And your clothes are all different! Where are your clothes?Where is the money! speak!"

　　And she fell to searching him. Marmeladov submissively andobediently held up both arms to facilitate the search. Not afarthing was there.

　　"Where's the money?" she cried- "Mercy on us, can he have drunk itall? There were twelve silver roubles left in the chest!" and in afury she seized him by the hair and dragged him into the room.Marmeladov seconded her efforts by meekly crawling along on his knees.

　　"And this is a consolation to me! This does not hurt me, but is apositive con-so-la-tion, ho-nou-red sir," he called out, shaken to andfro by his hair and even once striking the ground with his forehead.The child asleep on the floor woke up, and began to cry. The boy inthe corner losing all control began trembling and screaming and rushedto his sister in violent terror, almost in a fit. The eldest girlwas shaking like a leaf.

　　"He's drunk it! he's drunk it all," the poor woman screamed indespair- "and his clothes are gone! And they are hungry, hungry!"- andwringing her hands she pointed to the children. "Oh, accursed life!And you, are you not ashamed?"- she pounced all at once uponRaskolnikov- "from the tavern! Have been drinking with him? You havebeen drinking with him, too! Go away!"

　　The young man was hastening away without uttering a word. Theinner door was thrown wide open and inquisitive faces were peeringin at it. Coarse laughing faces with pipes and cigarettes and headswearing caps thrust themselves in at the doorway. Further in couldbe seen figures in dressing gowns flung open, in costumes ofunseemly scantiness, some of them with cards in their hands. They wereparticularly diverted, when Marmeladov, dragged about by his hair,shouted that it was a consolation to him. They even began to come intothe room; at last a sinister shrill outcry was heard: this came fromAmalia Lippevechsel herself pushing her way amongst them and trying torestore order after her own fashion and for the hundredth time tofrighten the poor woman by ordering her with coarse abuse to clear outof the room next day. As he went out, Raskolnikov had time to puthis hand into his pocket, to snatch up the coppers he had receivedin exchange for his rouble in the tavern and to lay them unnoticedon the window. Afterwards on the stairs, he changed his mind and wouldhave gone back.

　　"What a stupid thing I've done," he thought to himself, "they haveSonia and I want it myself." But reflecting that it would beimpossible to take it back now and that in any case he would nothave taken it, he dismissed it with a wave of his hand and went backto his lodging. "Sonia wants pomatum too," he said as he walkedalong the street, and he laughed malignantly- "such smartness costsmoney.... Hm! And maybe Sonia herself will be bankrupt to-day, forthere is always a risk, hunting big game... digging for gold... thenthey would all be without a crust to-morrow except for my money.Hurrah for Sonia! What a mine they've dug there! And they're makingthe most of it! Yes, they are making the most of it! They've wept overit and grown used to it. Man grows used to everything, the scoundrel!"

　　He sank into thought.

　　"And what if I am wrong," he cried suddenly after a moment'sthought. "What if man is not really a scoundrel, man in general, Imean, the whole race of mankind- then all the rest is prejudice,simply artificial terrors and there are no barriers and it's all as itshould be."

　　Chapter Three

　　HE WAKED up late next day after a broken sleep. But his sleep hadnot refreshed him; he waked up bilious, irritable, ill-tempered, andlooked with hatred at his room. It was a tiny cupboard of a room aboutsix paces in length. It had a poverty-stricken appearance with itsdusty yellow paper peeling off the walls, and it was so low-pitchedthat a man of more than average height was ill at ease in it andfelt every moment that he would knock his head against the ceiling.The furniture was in keeping with the room: there were three oldchairs, rather rickety; a painted table in the corner on which lay afew manuscripts and books; the dust that lay thick upon them showedthat they had been long untouched. A big clumsy sofa occupied almostthe whole of one wall and half the floor space of the room; it wasonce covered with chintz, but was now in rags and served Raskolnikovas a bed. Often he went to sleep on it, as he was, without undressing,without sheets, wrapped in his old student's overcoat, with his headon one little pillow, under which he heaped up all the linen he had,clean and dirty, by way of a bolster. A little table stood in front ofthe sofa.

　　It would have been difficult to sink to a lower ebb of disorder, butto Raskolnikov in his present state of mind this was positivelyagreeable. He had got completely away from every one, like atortoise in its shell, and even the sight of the servant girl whohad to wait upon him and looked sometimes into his room made himwrithe with nervous irritation. He was in the condition that overtakessome monomaniacs entirely concentrated upon one thing. His landladyhad for the last fortnight given up sending him in meals, and he hadnot yet thought of expostulating with her, though he went withouthis dinner. Nastasya, the cook and only servant, was rather pleased atthe lodger's mood and had entirely given up sweeping and doing hisroom, only once a week or so she would stray into his room with abroom. She waked him up that day.

　　"Get up, why are you asleep!" she called to him. "It's past nine,I have brought you some tea; will you have a cup? I should thinkyou're fairly starving?"

　　Raskolnikov opened his eyes, started and recognized Nastasya.

　　"From the landlady, eh?" he asked, slowly and with a sickly facesitting up on the sofa.

　　"From the landlady, indeed!"

　　She set before him her own cracked teapot full of weak and stale teaand laid two yellow lumps of sugar by the side of it.

　　"Here, Nastasya, take it please," he said, fumbling in his pocket(for he had slept in his clothes) and taking out a handful of coppers-"run and buy me a loaf. And get me a little sausage, the cheapest,at the pork-butcher's."

　　"The loaf I'll fetch you this very minute, but wouldn't you ratherhave some cabbage soup instead of sausage? It's capital soup,yesterday's. I saved it for you yesterday, but you came in late.It's fine soup."

　　When the soup had been brought, and he had begun upon it, Nastasyasat down beside him on the sofa and began chatting. She was acountry peasant-woman and a very talkative one.

　　"Praskovya Pavlovna means to complain to the police about you,"she said.

　　He scowled.

　　"To the police? What does she want?"

　　"You don't pay her money and you won't turn out of the room.That's what she wants, to be sure."

　　"The devil, that's the last straw," he muttered, grinding his teeth,"no, that would not suit me... just now. She is a fool," he addedaloud. "I'll go and talk to her to-day."

　　"Fool she is and no mistake, just as I am. But why, if you are soclever, do you lie here like a sack and have nothing to show for it?One time you used to go out, you say, to teach children. But why is ityou do nothing now?"

　　"I am doing..." Raskolnikov began sullenly and reluctantly.

　　"What are you doing?"

　　"Work..."

　　"What sort of work?"

　　"I am thinking," he answered seriously after a pause.

　　Nastasya was overcome with a fit of laughter. She was given tolaughter and when anything amused her, she laughed inaudibly,quivering and shaking all over till she felt ill.

　　"And have you made much money by your thinking?" she managed toarticulate at last.

　　"One can't go out to give lessons without boots. And I'm sick ofit."

　　"Don't quarrel with your bread and butter."

　　"They pay so little for lessons. What's the use of a few coppers?"he answered, reluctantly, as though replying to his own thought.

　　"And you want to get a fortune all at once?"

　　He looked at her strangely.

　　"Yes, I want a fortune," he answered firmly, after a brief pause.

　　"Don't be in such a hurry, you quite frighten me! Shall I get youthe loaf or not?"

　　"As you please."

　　"Ah, I forgot! A letter came for you yesterday when you were out."

　　"A letter? for me! from whom?"

　　"I can't say. I gave three copecks of my own to the postman forit. Will you pay me back?"

　　"Then bring it to me, for God's sake, bring it," cried Raskolnikovgreatly excited- "good God!"

　　A minute later the letter was brought him. That was it: from hismother, from the province of R___. He turned pale when he took it.It was a long while since he had received a letter, but anotherfeeling also suddenly stabbed his heart.

　　"Nastasya, leave me alone, for goodness' sake; here are your threecopecks, but for goodness' sake, make haste and go!"

　　The letter was quivering in his hand; he did not want to open itin her presence; he wanted to be left alone with this letter. WhenNastasya had gone out, he lifted it quickly to his lips and kissed it;then he gazed intently at the address, the small, sloping handwriting,so dear and familiar, of the mother who had once taught him to readand write. He delayed; he seemed almost afraid of something. At lasthe opened it; it was a thick heavy letter, weighing over two ounces,two large sheets of note paper were covered with very smallhandwriting.

　　"My dear Rodya," wrote his mother- "it's two months since I last hada talk with you by letter which has distressed me and even kept meawake at night, thinking. But I am sure you will not blame me for myinevitable silence. You know how I love you; you are all we have tolook to, Dounia and I, you are our all, our one hope, our one stay.What a grief it was to me when I heard that you had given up theuniversity some months ago, for want of means to keep yourself andthat you had lost your lessons and your other work! How could I helpyou out of my hundred and twenty roubles a year pension? The fifteenroubles I sent you four months ago I borrowed, as you know, onsecurity of my pension, from Vassily Ivanovitch Vahrushin a merchantof this town. He is a kind-hearted man and was a friend of yourfather's too. But having given him the right to receive the pension, Ihad to wait till the debt was paid off and that is only just done,so that I've been unable to send you anything all this time. Butnow, thank God, I believe I shall be able to send you something moreand in fact we may congratulate ourselves on our good fortune now,of which I hasten to inform you. In the first place, would you haveguessed, dear Rodya, that your sister has been living with me forthe last six weeks and we shall not be separated in the future.Thank God, her sufferings are over, but I will tell you everythingin order, so that you may know just how everything has happened andall that we have hitherto concealed from you. When you wrote to me twomonths ago that you had heard that Dounia had a great deal to put upwith in the Svidrigrailovs' house, when you wrote that and asked me totell you all about it- what could I write in answer to you? If I hadwritten the whole truth to you, I dare say you would have thrown upeverything and have come to us, even if you had to walk all the way,for I know your character and your feelings, and you would not letyour sister be insulted. I was in despair myself, but what could I do?And, besides, I did not know the whole truth myself then. What made itall so difficult was that Dounia received a hundred roubles in advancewhen she took the place as governess in their family, on conditionof part of her salary being deducted every month, and so it wasimpossible to throw up the situation without repaying the debt. Thissum (now I can explain it all to you, my precious Rodya) she tookchiefly in order to send you sixty roubles, which you needed soterribly then and which you received from us last year. We deceivedyou then, writing that this money came from Dounia's savings, but thatwas not so, and now I tell you all about it, because, thank God,things have suddenly changed for the better, and that you may know howDounia loves you and what a heart she has. At first indeed Mr.Svidrigailov treated her very rudely and used to make disrespectfuland jeering remarks at table.... But I don't want to go into all thosepainful details, so as not to worry you for nothing when it is now allover. In short, in spite of the kind and generous behaviour of MarfaPetrovna, Mr. Svidrigailov's wife, and all the rest of thehousehold, Dounia had a very hard time, especially when Mr.Svidrigailov, relapsing into his old regimental habits, was underthe influence of Bacchus. And how do you think it was all explainedlater on? Would you believe that the crazy fellow had conceived apassion for Dounia from the beginning, but had concealed it under ashow of rudeness and contempt. Possibly he was ashamed and horrifiedhimself at his own flighty hopes, considering his years and hisbeing the father of a family; and that made him angry with Dounia. Andpossibly, too, he hoped by his rude and sneering behaviour to hide thetruth from others. But at last he lost all control and had the face tomake Dounia an open and shameful proposal, promising her all sortsof inducements and offering, besides, to throw up everything andtake her to another estate of his, or even abroad. You can imagine allshe went through! To leave her situation at once was impossible notonly on account of the money debt, but also to spare the feelings ofMarfa Petrovna, whose suspicions would have been aroused; and thenDounia would have been the cause of a rupture in the family. And itwould have meant a terrible scandal for Dounia too; that would havebeen inevitable. There were various other reasons owing to whichDounia could not hope to escape from that awful house for anothersix weeks. You know Dounia, of course; you know how clever she isand what a strong will she has. Dounia can endure a great deal andeven in the most difficult cases she has the fortitude to maintain herfirmness. She did not even write to me about everything for fear ofupsetting me, although we were constantly in communication. It allended very unexpectedly. Marfa Petrovna accidentally overheard herhusband imploring Dounia in the garden, and, putting quite a wronginterpretation on the position, threw the blame upon her, believingher to be the cause of it all. An awful scene took place betweenthem on the spot in the garden; Marfa Petrovna went so far as tostrike Dounia, refused to hear anything and was shouting at her fora whole hour and then gave orders that Dounia should be packed offat once to me in a plain peasant's cart, into which they flung all herthings, her linen and her clothes, all pell-mell, without folding itup and packing it. And a heavy shower of rain came on, too, andDounia, insulted and put to shame, had to drive with a peasant in anopen cart all the seventeen versts into town. Only think now whatanswer could I have sent to the letter I received from you twomonths ago and what could I have written? I was in despair; I darednot write to you the truth because you would have been very unhappy,mortified and indignant, and yet what could you do? You could onlyperhaps ruin yourself, and, besides, Dounia would not allow it; andfill up my letter with trifles when my heart was so full of sorrow,I could not. For a whole month the town was full of gossip aboutthis scandal, and it came to such a pass that Dounia and I dared noteven go to church on account of the contemptuous looks, whispers,and even remarks made aloud about us. All our acquaintances avoidedus, nobody even bowed to us in the street, and I learnt that someshopmen and clerks were intending to insult us in a shameful way,smearing the gates of our house with pitch, so that the landlord beganto tell us we must leave. All this was set going by Marfa Petrovna whomanaged to slander Dounia and throw dirt at her in every family. Sheknows every one in the neighbourhood, and that month she wascontinually coming into the town, and as she is rather talkative andfond of gossiping about her family affairs and particularly ofcomplaining to all and each of her husband- which is not at all right-so in a short time she had spread her story not only in the town,but over the whole surrounding district. It made me ill, but Douniabore it better than I did, and if only you could have seen how sheendured it all and tried to comfort me and cheer me up! She is anangel! But by God's mercy, our sufferings were cut short: Mr.Svidrigailov returned to his senses and repented and, probably feelingsorry for Dounia, he laid before Marfa Petrovna a complete andunmistakable proof of Dounia's innocence, in the form of a letterDounia had been forced to write and give to him, before Marfa Petrovnacame upon them in the garden. This letter, which remained in Mr.Svidrigailov's hands after her departure, she had written to refusepersonal explanations and secret interviews, for which he wasentreating her. In that letter she reproached him with great heatand indignation for the baseness of his behaviour in regard to MarfaPetrovna, reminding him that he was the father and head of a familyand telling him how infamous it was of him to torment and make unhappya defenceless girl, unhappy enough already. Indeed, dear Rodya, theletter was so nobly and touchingly written that I sobbed when I readit and to this day I cannot read it without tears. Moreover, theevidence of the servants, too, cleared Dounia's reputation; they hadseen and known a great deal more than Mr. Svidrigailov had himselfsupposed- as indeed is always the case with servants. Marfa Petrovnawas completely taken aback, and 'again crushed' as she said herself tous, but she was completely convinced of Dounia's innocence. The verynext day, being Sunday, she went straight to the Cathedral, knelt downand prayed with tears to Our Lady to give her strength to bear thisnew trial and to do her duty. Then she came straight from theCathedral to us, told us the whole story, wept bitterly and, fullypenitent, she embraced Dounia and besought her to forgive her. Thesame morning without any delay, she went round to all the houses inthe town and everywhere, shedding tears, she asserted in the mostflattering terms Dounia's innocence and the nobility of her feelingsand her behavior. What was more, she showed and read to every onethe letter in Dounia's own handwriting to Mr. Svidrigailov and evenallowed them to take copies of it- which I must say I think wassuperfluous. In this way she was busy for several days in drivingabout the whole town, because some people had taken offence throughprecedence having been given to others. And therefore they had to taketurns, so that in every house she was expected before she arrived, andevery one knew that on such and such a day Marfa Petrovna would bereading the letter in such and such a place and people assembled forevery reading of it, even many who had heard it several timesalready both in their own houses and in other people's. In myopinion a great deal, a very great deal of all this was unnecessary;but that's Marfa Petrovna's character. Anyway she succeeded incompletely re-establishing Dounia's reputation and the wholeignominy of this affair rested as an indelible disgrace upon herhusband, as the only person to blame, so that I really began to feelsorry for him; it was really treating the crazy fellow too harshly.Dounia was at once asked to give lessons in several families, butshe refused. All of a sudden every one began to treat her withmarked respect and all this did much to bring about the event bywhich, one may say, our whole fortunes are now transformed. You mustknow, dear Rodya, that Dounia has a suitor and that she has alreadyconsented to marry him. I hasten to tell you all about the matter, andthough it has been arranged without asking your consent, I think youwill not be aggrieved with me or with your sister on that account, foryou will see that we could not wait and put off our decision till weheard from you. And you could not have judged all the facts withoutbeing on the spot. This was how it happened. He is already of the rankof a counsellor, Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, and is distantly relatedto Marfa Petrovna, who has been very active in bringing the matchabout. It began with his expressing through her his desire to make ouracquaintance. He was properly received, drank coffee with us and thevery next day he sent us a letter in which he very courteously made anoffer and begged for a speedy and decided answer. He is a very busyman and is in a great hurry to get to Petersburg, so that every momentis precious to him. At first, of course, we were greatly surprised, asit had all happened so quickly and unexpectedly. We thought and talkedit over the whole day. He is a well-to-do man, to be depended upon, hehas two posts in the government and has already made his fortune. Itis true that he is forty-five years old, but he is of a fairlyprepossessing appearance and might still be thought attractive bywomen, and he is altogether a very respectable and presentable man,only he seems a little morose and somewhat conceited. But possiblythat may only be the impression he makes at first sight. And beware,dear Rodya, when he comes to Petersburg, as he shortly will do, bewareof judging him too hastily and severely, as your way is, if there isanything you do not like in him at first sight. I give you thiswarning, although I feel sure that he will make a favourableimpression upon you. Moreover, in order to understand any man one mustbe deliberate and careful to avoid forming prejudices and mistakenideas, which are very difficult to correct and get over afterwards.And Pyotr Petrovitch, judging by many indications, is a thoroughlyestimable man. At his first visit, indeed, he told us that he was apractical man, but still he shares, as he expressed it, many of theconvictions 'of our most rising generation' and he is an opponent ofall prejudices. He said a good deal more, for he seems a littleconceited and likes to be listened to, but this is scarcely a vice. I,of course, understood very little of it, but Dounia explained to methat, though he is not a man of great education, he is clever andseems to be good-natured. You know your sister's character, Rodya. Sheis a resolute, sensible, patient and generous girl, but she has apassionate heart, as I know very well. Of course, there is no greatlove either on his side, or on hers, but Dounia is a clever girl andhas the heart of an angel, and will make it her duty to make herhusband happy who on his side will make her happiness his care. Ofthat we have no good reason to doubt, though it must be admitted thematter has been arranged in great haste. Besides he is a man ofgreat prudence and he will see, to be sure, of himself, that his ownhappiness will be the more secure, the happier Dounia is with him. Andas for some defects of character, for some habits and even certaindifferences of opinion- which indeed are inevitable even in thehappiest marriages- Dounia has said that, as regards all that, sherelies on herself, that there is nothing to be uneasy about, andthat she is ready to put up with a great deal, if only their futurerelationship can be an honourable and straightforward one. He struckme, for instance, at first, as rather abrupt, but that may well comefrom his being an outspoken man, and that is no doubt how it is. Forinstance, at his second visit, after he had received Dounia's consent,in the course of conversation, he declared that before making Dounia'sacquaintance, he had made up his mind to marry a girl of goodreputation, without dowry and, above all, one who had experiencedpoverty, because, as he explained, a man ought not to be indebted tohis wife, but that it is better for a wife to look upon her husband asher benefactor. I must add that he expressed it more nicely andpolitely than I have done, for I have forgotten his actual phrases andonly remember the meaning. And, besides, it was obviously not saidof design, but slipped out in the heat of conversation, so that hetried afterwards to correct himself and smooth it over, but all thesame it did strike me as somewhat rude, and I said so afterwards toDounia. But Dounia was vexed, and answered that 'words are not deeds,'and that, of course, is perfectly true. Dounia did not sleep all nightbefore she made up her mind, and, thinking that I was asleep, shegot out of bed and was walking up and down the room all night; at lastshe knelt down before the ikon and prayed long and fervently and inthe morning she told me that she had decided.

　　"I have mentioned already that Pyotr Petrovitch is just settingoff for Petersburg, where he has a great deal of business, and hewants to open a legal bureau. He has been occupied for many years inconducting civil and commercial litigation, and only the other dayhe won an important case. He has to be in Petersburg because he has animportant case before the Senate. So, Rodya dear, he may be of thegreatest use to you, in every way indeed, and Dounia and I have agreedthat from this very day you could definitely enter upon your careerand might consider that your future is marked out and assured for you.Oh, if only this comes to pass! This would be such a benefit that wecould only look upon it as a providential blessing. Dounia is dreamingof nothing else. We have even ventured already to drop a few wordson the subject to Pyotr Petrovitch. He was cautious in his answer, andsaid that, of course, as he could not get on without a secretary, itwould be better to be paying a salary to a relation than to astranger, if only the former were fitted for the duties (as thoughthere could be doubt of your being fitted!) but then he expresseddoubts whether your studies at the university would leave you time forwork at his office. The matter dropped for the time, but Dounia isthinking of nothing else now. She has been in a sort of fever forthe last few days, and has already made a regular plan for yourbecoming in the end an associate and even a partner in PyotrPetrovitch's business, which might well be, seeing that you are astudent of law. I am in complete agreement with her, Rodya, andshare all her plans and hopes, and think there is every probability ofrealising them. And in spite of Pyotr Petrovitch's evasiveness, verynatural at present, (since he does not know you) Dounia is firmlypersuaded that she will gain everything by her good influence over herfuture husband; this she is reckoning upon. Of course we are carefulnot to talk of any of these more remote plans to Pyotr Petrovitch,especially of your becoming his partner. He is a practical man andmight take this very coldly, it might all seem to him simply aday-dream. Nor has either Dounia or I breathed a word to him of thegreat hopes we have of his helping us to pay for your universitystudies; we have not spoken of it in the first place, because itwill come to pass of itself, later on, and he will no doubt withoutwasting words offer to do it of himself, (as though he could refuseDounia that) the more readily since you may by your own efforts becomehis right hand in the office, and receive this assistance not as acharity, but as a salary earned by your own work. Dounia wants toarrange it all like this and I quite agree with her. And we have notspoken of our plans for another reason, that is, because Iparticularly wanted you to feel on an equal footing when you firstmeet him. When Dounia spoke to him with enthusiasm about you, heanswered that one could never judge of a man without seeing him close,for oneself, and that he looked forward to forming his own opinionwhen he makes your acquaintance. Do you know, my precious Rodya, Ithink that perhaps for some reasons (nothing to do with PyotrPetrovitch though, simply for my own personal, perhaps old-womanish,fancies) I should do better to go on living by myself, apart, thanwith them, after the wedding. I am convinced that he will begenerous and delicate enough to invite me and to urge me to remainwith my daughter for the future, and if he has said nothing about ithitherto, it is simply because it has been taken for granted; but Ishall refuse. I have noticed more than once in my life that husbandsdon't quite get on with their mothers-in-law, and I don't want to bethe least bit in any one's way, and for my own sake, too, would ratherbe quite independent, so long as I have a crust of bread of my own,and such children as you and Dounia. If possible, I would settlesomewhere near you, for the most joyful piece of news, dear Rodya, Ihave kept for the end of my letter: know then, my dear boy, that wemay, perhaps, be all together in a very short time and may embrace oneanother again after a separation of almost three years! It issettled for certain that Dounia and I are to set off for Petersburg,exactly when I don't know, but very, very soon, possibly in a week. Itall depends on Pyotr Petrovitch who will let us know when he has hadtime to look round him in Petersburg. To suit his own arrangementshe is anxious to have the ceremony as soon as possible, even beforethe fast of Our Lady, if it could be managed, or if that is too soonto be ready, immediately after. Oh, with what happiness I shallpress you to my heart! Dounia is all excitement at the joyfulthought of seeing you, she said one day in joke that she would beready to marry Pyotr Petrovitch for that alone. She is an angel! Sheis not writing anything to you now, and has only told me to write thatshe has so much, so much to tell you that she is not going to takeup her pen now, for a few lines would tell you nothing, and it wouldonly mean upsetting herself; she bids me send you her love andinnumerable kisses. But although we shall be meeting so soon,perhaps I shall send you as much money as I can in a day or two. Nowthat every one has heard that Dounia is to marry Pyotr Petrovitch,my credit has suddenly improved and I know that Afanasy Ivanovitchwill trust me now even to seventy-five roubles on the security of mypension, so that perhaps I shall be able to send you twenty-five oreven thirty roubles. I would send you more, but I am uneasy aboutour travelling expenses; for though Pyotr Petrovitch has been sokind as to undertake part of the expenses of the journey, that is tosay, he has taken upon himself the conveyance of our bags and bigtrunk (which will be conveyed through some acquaintances of his), wemust reckon upon some expenses on our arrival in Petersburg, wherewe can't be left without a halfpenny, at least for the first few days.But we have calculated it all, Dounia and I, to the last penny, and wesee that the journey will not cost very much. It is only ninety verstsfrom us to the railway and we have come to an agreement with adriver we know, so as to be in readiness; and from there Dounia andI can travel quite comfortably third class. So that I may verylikely be able to send to you not twenty-five, but thirty roubles. Butenough; I have covered two sheets already and there is no space leftfor more; our whole history, but so many events have happened! Andnow, my precious Rodya, I embrace you and send you a mother's blessingtill we meet. Love Dounia your sister, Rodya; love her as she lovesyou and understand that she loves you beyond everything, more thanherself. She is an angel and you, Rodya, you are everything to us- ourone hope, our one consolation. If only you are happy, we shall behappy. Do you still say your prayers, Rodya, and believe in themercy of our Creator and our Redeemer? I am afraid in my heart thatyou may have been visited by the new spirit of infidelity that isabroad to-day! If it is so, I pray for you. Remember, dear boy, how inyour childhood, when your father was living, you used to lisp yourprayers at my knee, and how happy we all were in those days. Good-bye,till we meet then- I embrace you warmly, warmly, with many kisses.

　　"Yours till death

　　"PULCHERIA RASKOLNIKOV."-

　　Almost from the first, while he read the letter, Raskolnikov'sface was wet with tears; but when he finished it, his face was paleand distorted and a bitter, wrathful and malignant smile was on hislips. He laid his head down on his threadbare dirty pillow andpondered, pondered a long time. His heart was beating violently, andhis brain was in a turmoil. At last he felt cramped and stifled in thelittle yellow room that was like a cupboard or a box. His eyes and hismind craved for space. He took up his hat and went out, this timewithout dread of meeting any one; he had forgotten his dread. Heturned in the direction of the Vassilyevsky Ostrov, walking alongVassilyevsky Prospect, as though hastening on some business, but hewalked, as his habit was, without noticing his way, muttering and evenspeaking aloud to himself, to the astonishment of the passers-by. Manyof them took him to be drunk.

　　Chapter Four

　　HIS MOTHER'S letter had been a torture to him, but as regards thechief fact in it, he had felt not one moment's hesitation, even whilsthe was reading the letter. The essential question was settled, andirrevocably settled, in his mind: "Never such a marriage while I amalive and Mr. Luzhin be damned;" "The thing is perfectly clear," hemuttered to himself, with a malignant smile anticipating the triumphof his decision. "No, mother, no, Dounia, you won't deceive me! andthen they apologise for not asking my advice and for taking thedecision without me! I dare say! They imagine it is arranged now andcan't be broken off; but we will see whether it can or not! Amagnificent excuse: 'Pyotr Petrovitch is such a busy man that even hiswedding has to be in post-haste, almost by express.' No, Dounia, I seeit all and I know what you want to say to me; and I know too whatyou were thinking about, when you walked up and down all night, andwhat your prayers were like before the Holy Mother of Kazan who standsin mother's bedroom. Bitter is the ascent to Golgotha.... Hm... soit is finally settled; you have determined to marry a sensiblebusiness man, Avdotya Romanovna, one who has a fortune (has alreadymade his fortune, that is so much more solid and impressive) a man whoholds two government posts and who shares the ideas of our most risinggeneration, as mother writes, and who seems to be kind, as Douniaherself observes. That seems beats everything! And that very Douniafor that very 'seems' is marrying him! Splendid! splendid!

　　"...But I should like to know why mother has written to me about'our most rising generation'? Simply as a descriptive touch, or withthe idea of prepossessing me in favour of Mr. Luzhin? Oh, thecunning of them! I should like to know one thing more: how far theywere open with one another that day and night and all this time since?Was it all put into words, or did both understand that they had thesame thing at heart and in their minds, so that there was no need tospeak of it aloud, and better not to speak of it. Most likely it waspartly like that, from mother's letter it's evident: he struck heras rude a little, and mother in her simplicity took her observationsto Dounia. And she was sure to be vexed and 'answered her angrily.'I should think so! Who would not be angered when it was quite clearwithout any naive questions and when it was understood that it wasuseless to discuss it. And why does she write to me, 'love Dounia,Rodya, and she loves you more than herself'? Has she a secretconscience-prick at sacrificing her daughter to her son? 'You areour one comfort, you are everything to us.' Oh, mother!"

　　His bitterness grew more and more intense, and if he had happened tomeet Mr. Luzhin at the moment, he might have murdered him.

　　"Hm... yes, that's true," he continued, pursuing the whirlingideas that chased each other in his brain, "it is true that 'itneeds time and care to get to know a man,' but there is no mistakeabout Mr. Luzhin. The chief thing is he is 'a man of business andseems kind,' that was something, wasn't it, to send the bags and bigbox for them! A kind man, no doubt after that! But his bride and hermother are to drive in a peasant's cart covered with sacking (Iknow, I have been driven in it). No matter! It is only ninety verstsand then they can 'travel very comfortably, third class,' for athousand versts! Quite right, too. One must cut one's coat accordingto one's cloth, but what about you, Mr. Luzhin? She is yourbride.... And you must be aware that her mother has to raise moneyon her pension for the journey. To be sure it's a matter ofbusiness, a partnership for mutual benefit, with equal shares andexpenses;- food and drink provided, but pay for your tobacco. Thebusiness man has got the better of them, too. The luggage will costless than their fares and very likely go for nothing. How is it thatthey don't both see all that, or is it that they don't want to see?And they are pleased, pleased! And to think that this is only thefirst blossoming, and that the real fruits are to come! But whatreally matters is not the stinginess, is not the meanness, but thetone of the whole thing. For that will be the tone after marriage,it's a foretaste of it. And mother too, why should she be so lavish?What will she have by the time she gets to Petersburg? Three silverroubles or two 'paper ones' as she says.... that old woman... hm. Whatdoes she expect to live upon in Petersburg afterwards? She has herreasons already for guessing that she could not live with Dounia afterthe marriage, even for the first few months. The good man has no doubtlet slip something on that subject also, though mother would denyit: 'I shall refuse,' says she. On whom is she reckoning then? Isshe counting on what is left of her hundred and twenty roubles ofpension when Afanasy Ivanovitch's debt is paid? She knits woollenshawls and embroiders cuffs, ruining her old eyes. And all hershawls don't add more than twenty roubles a year to her hundred andtwenty, I know that. So she is building all her hopes all the timeon Mr. Luzhin's generosity; 'he will offer it of himself, he willpress it on me.' You may wait a long time for that! That's how italways is with these Schilleresque noble hearts; till the lastmoment every goose is a swan with them, till the last moment, theyhope for the best and will see nothing wrong, and although they havean inkling of the other side of the picture, yet they won't face thetruth till they are forced to; the very thought of it makes themshiver; they thrust the truth away with both hands, until the man theydeck out in false colours puts a fool's cap on them with his ownhands. I should like to know whether Mr. Luzhin has any orders ofmerit; I bet he has the Anna in his buttonhole and that he puts iton when he goes to dine with contractors or merchants. He will be sureto have it for his wedding, too! Enough of him, confound him!

　　"Well,... mother I don't wonder at, it's like her, God bless her,but how could Dounia? Dounia, darling, as though I did not know you!You were nearly twenty when I saw you last: I understood you then.Mother writes that 'Dounia can put up with a great deal.' I knowthat very well. I knew that two years and a half ago, and for the lasttwo and a half years I have been thinking about it, thinking of justthat, that 'Dounia can put up with a great deal.' If she could putup with Mr. Svidrigailov and all the rest of it, she certainly can putup with a great deal. And now mother and she have taken it intotheir heads that she can put up with Mr. Luzhin, who propounds thetheory of the superiority of wives raised from destitution and owingeverything to their husband's bounty- who propounds it, too, almost atthe first interview. Granted that he 'let it slip,' though he is asensible man, (yet maybe it was not a slip at all, but he meant tomake himself clear as soon as possible) but Dounia, Dounia? Sheunderstands the man, of course, but she will have to live with theman. Why! she'd live on black bread and water, she would not sellher soul, she would not barter her moral freedom for comfort; shewould not barter it for all Schleswig-Holstein, much less Mr. Luzhin'smoney. No, Dounia was not that sort when I knew her and... she isstill the same, of course! Yes, there's no denying, theSvidrigailovs are a bitter pill! It's a bitter thing to spend one'slife a governess in the provinces for two hundred roubles, but Iknow she would rather be a nigger on a plantation or a Lett with aGerman master, than degrade her soul, and her moral dignity, bybinding herself for ever to a man whom she does not respect and withwhom she has nothing in common- for her own advantage. And if Mr.Luzhin had been of unalloyed gold, or one huge diamond, she wouldnever have consented to become his legal concubine. Why is sheconsenting then? What's the point of it? What's the answer? It's clearenough: for herself, for her comfort, to save her life she would notsell herself, but for some one else she is doing it! For one sheloves, for one she adores, she will sell herself! That's what it allamounts to; for her brother, for her mother, she will sell herself!She will sell everything! In such cases, we 'overcome our moralfeeling if necessary,' freedom, peace, conscience even, all, all arebrought into the market. Let my life go, if only my dear ones may behappy! More than that, we become casuists, we learn to be Jesuiticaland for a time maybe we can soothe ourselves, we can persuadeourselves that it is one's duty for a good object. That's just likeus, it's as clear as daylight. It's clear that Rodion RomanovitchRaskolnikov is the central figure in the business, and no one else.Oh, yes, she can ensure his happiness, keep him in the university,make him a partner in the office, make his whole future secure;perhaps he may even be a rich man later on, prosperous, respected, andmay even end his life a famous man! But my mother? It's all Rodya,precious Rodya, her first born! For such a son who would not sacrificesuch a daughter! Oh, loving, over-partial hearts! Why, for his sake wewould not shrink even from Sonia's fate. Sonia, Sonia Marmeladov,the eternal victim so long as the world lasts. Have you taken themeasure of your sacrifice, both of you? Is it right? Can you bearit? Is it any use? Is there sense in it? And let me tell you,Dounia, Sonia's life is no worse than life with Mr. Luzhin. 'There canbe no question of love' mother writes. And what if there can be norespect either, if on the contrary there is aversion, contempt,repulsion, what then? So you will have to 'keep up your appearance,'too. Is that not so? Do you understand what that smartness means? Doyou understand that the Luzhin smartness is just the same thing asSonia's and may be worse, viler, baser, because in your case,Dounia, it's a bargain for luxuries, after all, but with Sonia it'ssimply a question of starvation. It has to be paid for, it has to bepaid for, Dounia, this smartness. And what if it's more than you canbear afterwards, if you regret it? The bitterness, the misery, thecurses, the tears hidden from all the world, for you are not a MarfaPetrovna. And how will your mother feel then? Even now she isuneasy, she is worried, but then, when she sees it all clearly? And I?Yes, indeed, what have you taken me for? I won't have yoursacrifice, Dounia, I won't have it, mother! It shall not be, so longas I am alive, it shall not, it shall not! I won't accept it!"

　　He suddenly paused in his reflection and stood still.

　　"It shall not be? But what are you going to do to prevent it? You'llforbid it? And what right have you? What can you promise them on yourside to give you such a right? Your whole life, your whole future, youwill devote to them when you have finished your studies and obtained apost? Yes, we have heard all that before, and that's all words, butnow? Now something must be done, now, do you understand that? And whatare you doing now? You are living upon them. They borrow on theirhundred roubles pension. They borrow from the Svidrigailovs. How areyou going to save them from Svidrigailovs, from Afanasy IvanovitchVahrushin, oh, future millionaire Zeus who would arrange their livesfor them? In another ten years? In another ten years, mother will beblind with knitting shawls, maybe with weeping too. She will be wornto a shadow with fasting; and my sister? Imagine for a moment what mayhave become of your sister in ten years? What may happen to her duringthose ten years? Can you fancy?"

　　So he tortured himself, fretting himself with such questions, andfinding a kind of enjoyment in it. And yet all these questions werenot new ones suddenly confronting him, they were old familiar aches.It was long since they had first begun to grip and rend his heart.Long, long ago his present anguish had its first beginnings; it hadwaxed and gathered strength, it had matured and concentrated, until ithad taken the form of a fearful, frenzied and fantastic question,which tortured his heart and mind, clamouring insistently for ananswer. Now his mother's letter had burst on him like a thunderclap.It was clear that he must not now suffer passively, worrying himselfover unsolved questions, but that he must do something, do it at once,and do it quickly. Anyway he must decide on something, or else...

　　"Or throw up life altogether!" he cried suddenly, in a frenzy-"accept one's lot humbly as it is, once for all and stifleeverything in oneself, giving up all claim to activity, life andlove!"

　　"Do you understand, sir, do you understand what it means when youhave absolutely nowhere to turn?" Marmeladov's question camesuddenly into his mind "for every man must have somewhere to turn..."

　　He gave a sudden start; another thought, that he had hadyesterday, slipped back into his mind. But he did not start at thethought recurring to him, for he knew, he had felt beforehand, that itmust come back, he was expecting it; besides it was not onlyyesterday's thought. The difference was that a month ago, yesterdayeven, the thought was a mere dream: but now... now it appeared not adream at all, it had taken a new menacing and quite unfamiliarshape, and he suddenly became aware of this himself.... He felt ahammering in his head, and there was a darkness before his eyes.

　　He looked round hurriedly, he was searching for something. He wantedto sit down and was looking for a seat; he was walking along the K____Boulevard. There was a seat about a hundred paces in front of him.He walked towards it as fast he could; but on the way he met with alittle adventure which absorbed all his attention. Looking for theseat, he had noticed a woman walking some twenty paces in front ofhim, but at first he took no more notice of her than of otherobjects that crossed his path. It had happened to him many times goinghome not to notice the road by which he was going, and he wasaccustomed to walk like that. But there was at first sight somethingso strange about the woman in front of him, that gradually hisattention was riveted upon her, at first reluctantly and, as itwere, resentfully, and then more and more intently. He felt a suddendesire to find out what it was that was so strange about the woman. Inthe first place, she appeared to be a girl quite young, and she waswalking in the great heat bareheaded and with no parasol or gloves,waving her arms about in an absurd way. She had on a dress of somelight silky material, but put on strangely awry, not properly hookedup, and torn open at the top of the skirt, close to the waist: a greatpiece was rent and hanging loose. A little kerchief was flung abouther bare throat, but lay slanting on one side. The girl was walkingunsteadily, too, stumbling and staggering from side to side. Shedrew Raskolnikov's whole attention at last. He overtook the girl atthe seat, but, on reaching it, she dropped down on it, in thecorner; she let her head sink on the back of the seat and closed hereyes, apparently in extreme exhaustion. Looking at her closely, he sawat once that she was completely drunk. It was a strange and shockingsight. He could hardly believe that he was not mistaken. He saw beforehim the face of a quite young, fair-haired girl- sixteen, perhapsnot more than fifteen years old, pretty little face, but flushed andheavy looking and, as it were, swollen. The girl seemed hardly to knowwhat she was doing; she crossed one leg over the other, lifting itindecorously, and showed every sign of being unconscious that shewas in the street.

　　Raskolnikov did not sit down, but he felt unwilling to leave her,and stood facing her in perplexity. This boulevard was never muchfrequented; and now, at two o'clock, in the stifling heat, it wasquite deserted. And yet on the further side of the boulevard, aboutfifteen paces away, a gentleman was standing on the edge of thepavement, he, too, would apparently have liked to approach the girlwith some object of his own. He, too, had probably seen her in thedistance and had followed her, but found Raskolnikov in his way. Helooked angrily at him, though he tried to escape his notice, and stoodimpatiently biding his time, till the unwelcome man in rags shouldhave moved away. His intentions were unmistakable. The gentleman was aplump, thickly-set man, about thirty, fashionably dressed, with a highcolour, red lips and moustaches. Raskolnikov felt furious; he had asudden longing to insult this fat dandy in some way. He left thegirl for a moment and walked towards the gentleman.

　　"Hey! You Svidrigailov! What do you want here?" he shouted,clenching his fists and laughing, spluttering with rage.

　　"What do you mean?" the gentleman asked sternly, scowling in haughtyastonishment.

　　"Get away, that's what I mean."

　　"How dare you, you low fellow!"

　　He raised his cane. Raskolnikov rushed at him with his fists,without reflecting that the stout gentleman was a match for two menlike himself. But at that instant some one seized him from behind, anda police constable stood between them.

　　"That's enough, gentlemen, no fighting, please, in a public place.What do you want? Who are you?" he asked Raskolnikov sternly, noticinghis rags.

　　Raskolnikov looked at him intently. He had a straight-forward,sensible, soldierly face, with grey moustaches and whiskers.

　　"You are just the man I want," Raskolnikov cried, catching at hisarm. "I am a student, Raskolnikov.... You may as well know thattoo," he added, addressing the gentleman, "come along, I havesomething to show you."

　　And taking the policeman by the hand he drew him towards the seat.

　　"Look here, hopelessly drunk, and she has just come down theboulevard. There is no telling who and what she is, she does notlook like a professional. It's more likely she has been given drinkand deceived somewhere... for the first time... you understand? andthey've put her out into the street like that. Look at the way herdress is torn, and the way it has been put on: she has been dressed bysomebody, she has not dressed herself, and dressed by unpractisedhands, by a man's hands; that's evident. And now look there: I don'tknow that dandy with whom I was going to fight, I see him for thefirst time, but, he, too has seen her on the road, just now, drunk,not knowing what she is doing, and now he is very eager to get hold ofher, to get her away somewhere while she is in this state... that'scertain, believe me, I am not wrong. I saw him myself watching her andfollowing her, but I prevented him, and he is just waiting for me togo away. Now he has walked away a little, and is standing still,pretending to make a cigarette.... Think how can we keep her out ofhis hands, and how are we to get her home?"

　　The policeman saw it all in a flash. The stout gentleman was easy tounderstand, he turned to consider the girl. The policeman bent over toexamine her more closely, and his face worked with genuine compassion.

　　"Ah, what a pity!" he said, shaking his head- "why, she is quite achild! She has been deceived, you can see that at once. Listen, lady,"he began addressing her, "where do you live?" The girl opened herweary and sleepy-looking eyes, gazed blankly at the speaker andwaved her hand.

　　"Here," said Raskolnikov feeling in his pocket and finding twentycopecks, "here, call a cab and tell him to drive her to her address.The only thing is to find out her address!"

　　"Missy, missy!" the policeman began again, taking the money. "I'llfetch you a cab and take you home myself. Where shall I take you,eh? Where do you live?"

　　"Go away! They won't let me alone," the girl muttered, and once morewaved her hand.

　　"Ach, ach, how shocking! It's shameful, missy, it's a shame!" Heshook his head again, shocked, sympathetic and indignant.

　　"It's a difficult job," the policeman said to Raskolnikov, and as hedid so, he looked him up and down in a rapid glance. He. too, musthave seemed a strange figure to him: dressed in rags and handing himmoney!

　　"Did you meet her far from here?" he asked him.

　　"I tell you she was walking in front of me, staggering, just here,in the boulevard. She only just reached the seat and sank down on it."

　　"Ah, the shameful things that are done in the world nowadays, Godhave mercy on us! An innocent creature like that, drunk already! Shehas been deceived, that's a sure thing. See how her dress has beentorn too.... Ah, the vice one sees nowadays! And as likely as notshe belongs to gentlefolk too, poor ones maybe.... There are many likethat nowadays. She looks refined, too, as though she were a lady," andhe bent over her once more.

　　Perhaps he had daughters growing up like that, "looking likeladies and refined" with pretensions to gentility and smartness....

　　"The chief thing is," Raskolnikov persisted, "to keep her out ofthis scoundrel's hands! Why should he outrage her! It's as clear asday what he is after; ah, the brute, he is not moving off!"

　　Raskolnikov spoke aloud and pointed to him. The gentleman heard him,and seemed about to fly into a rage again, but thought better of it,and confined himself to a contemptuous look. He then walked slowlyanother ten paces away and again halted.

　　"Keep her out of his hands we can," said the constable thoughtfully,"if only she'd tell us where to take her, but as it is.... Missy, hey,missy!" he bent over her once more.

　　She opened her eyes fully all of a sudden, looked at him intently,as though realising something, got up from the seat and walked away inthe direction from which she had come. "Oh shameful wretches, theywon't let me alone!" she said, waving her hand again. She walkedquickly, though staggering as before. The dandy followed her, butalong another avenue, keeping his eye on her.

　　"Don't be anxious, I won't let him have her," the policeman saidresolutely, and he set off after them.

　　"Ah, the vice one sees nowadays!" he repeated aloud, sighing.

　　At that moment something seemed to sting Raskolnikov; in aninstant a complete revulsion of feeling came over him.

　　"Hey, here!" he shouted after the policeman.

　　The latter turned round.

　　"Let them be! What is it to do with you? Let her go! Let him amusehimself." He pointed at the dandy, "What is it to do with you?"

　　The policeman was bewildered, and stared at him open-eyed.Raskolnikov laughed.

　　"Well!" ejaculated the policeman, with a gesture of contempt, and hewalked after the dandy and the girl, probably taking Raskolnikov for amadman or something even worse.

　　"He has carried off my twenty copecks," Raskolnikov murmured angrilywhen he was left alone. "Well, let him take as much from the otherfellow to allow him to have the girl and so let it end. And why didI want to interfere? Is it for me to help? Have I any right to help?Let them devour each other alive- what is to me? How did I dare togive him twenty copecks? Were they mine?"

　　In spite of those strange words he felt very wretched. He sat downon the deserted seat. His thought strayed aimlessly.... He found ithard to fix his mind on anything at that moment. He longed to forgethimself altogether, to forget everything, and then to wake up andbegin life anew....

　　"Poor girl!" he said, looking at the empty corner where she had sat-"She will come to herself and weep, and then her mother will findout.... She will give her a beating, a horrible, shameful beatingand then maybe, turn her out of doors.... And even if she does not,the Darya Frantsovnas will get wind of it, and the girl will soon beslipping out on the sly here and there. Then there will be thehospital directly (that's always the luck of those girls withrespectable mothers, who go wrong on the sly) and then... again thehospital... drink... the taverns... and more hospital, in two or threeyears- a wreck, and her life over at eighteen or nineteen.... Have notI seen cases like that? And how have they been brought to it? Why,they've all come to it like that. Ugh! But what does it matter? That'sas it should be, they tell us. A certain percentage, they tell us,must every year go... that way... to the devil, I suppose, so that therest may remain chaste, and not be interfered with. A percentage! Whatsplendid words they have; they are so scientific, so consolatory....Once you've said 'percentage,' there's nothing more to worry about. Ifwe had any other word... maybe we might feel more uneasy.... Butwhat if Dounia were one of the percentage! Of another one if notthat one?

　　"But where am I going?" he thought suddenly. "Strange, I came outfor something. As soon as I had read the letter I came out.... I wasgoing to Vassilyevsky Ostrov, to Razumihin. That's what it was...now I remember. What for, though? And what put the idea of going toRazumihin into my head just now? That's curious."

　　He wondered at himself. Razumihin was one of his old comrades at theuniversity. It was remarkable that Raskolnikov had hardly anyfriends at the university; he kept aloof from every one, went to seeno one, and did not welcome any one who came to see him, and indeedevery one soon gave him up. He took no part in the students'gatherings, amusements or conversations. He worked with greatintensity without sparing himself, and he was respected for this,but no one liked him. He was very poor, and there was a sort ofhaughty pride and reserve about him, as though he were keepingsomething to himself. He seemed to some of his comrades to look downupon them all as children, as though he were superior indevelopment, knowledge and convictions, as though their beliefs andinterests were beneath him.

　　With Razumihin he had got on, or, at least, he was more unreservedand communicative with him. Indeed it was impossible to be on anyother terms with Razumihin. He was an exceptionally good-humouredand candid youth, good-natured to the point of simplicity, though bothdepth and dignity lay concealed under that simplicity. The better ofhis comrades understood this, and all were fond of him. He wasextremely intelligent, though he was certainly rather a simpleton attimes. He was of striking appearance- tall, thin, blackhaired andalways badly shaved. He was sometimes uproarious and was reputed to beof great physical strength. One night, when out in a festivecompany, he had with one blow laid a gigantic policeman on his back.There was no limit to his drinking powers, but he could abstain fromdrink altogether; he sometimes went too far in his pranks; but hecould do without pranks altogether. Another thing striking aboutRazumihin, no failure distressed him, and it seemed as though nounfavourable circumstances could crush him. He could lodge anywhere,and bear the extremes of cold and hunger. He was very poor, and kepthimself entirely on what he could earn by work of one sort or another.He knew of no end of resources by which to earn money. He spent onewhole winter without lighting his stove, and used to declare that heliked it better, because one slept more soundly in the cold. For thepresent he, too, had been obliged to give up the university, but itwas only for a time, and he was working with all his might to saveenough to return to his studies again. Raskolnikov had not been to seehim for the last four months, and Razumihin did not even know hisaddress. About two months before, they had met in the street, butRaskolnikov had turned away and even crossed to the other side that hemight not be observed. And though Razumihin noticed him, he passed himby, as he did not want to annoy him.

　　Chapter Five

　　"OF COURSE, I've been meaning lately to go to Razumihin's to ask forwork, to ask him to get me lessons or something..." Raskolnikovthought, "but what help can he be to me now? Suppose he gets melessons, suppose he shares his last farthing with me, if he has anyfarthings, so that I could get some boots and make myself tidyenough to give lessons... hm... Well and what then? What shall I dowith the few coppers I earn? That's not what I want now. It's reallyabsurd for me to go to Razumihin...."

　　The question why he was now going to Razumihin agitated him evenmore than he was himself aware; he kept uneasily seeking for somesinister significance in this apparently ordinary action.

　　"Could I have expected to set it all straight and to find a wayout by means of Razumihin alone?" he asked himself in perplexity.

　　He pondered and rubbed his forehead, and, strange to say, after longmusing, suddenly, as if it were spontaneously and by chance, afantastic thought came into his head.

　　"Hm... to Razumihin's," he said all at once, calmly, as though hehad reached a final determination. "I shall go to Razumihin's ofcourse, but... not now. I shall go to him... on the next day after It,when It will be over and everything will begin afresh...."

　　And suddenly he realised what he was thinking.

　　"After It," he shouted, jumping up from the seat, "but is Itreally going to happen? Is it possible it really will happen?" He leftthe seat, and went off almost at a run; he meant to turn back,homewards, but the thought of going home suddenly filled him withintense loathing; in that hole, in that awful little cupboard ofhis, all this had for a month past been growing up in him; and hewalked on at random.

　　His nervous shudder had passed into a fever that made him feelshivering; in spite of the heat he felt cold. With a kind of effort hebegan almost unconsciously, from some inner craving, to stare at allthe objects before him, as though looking for something to distracthis attention; but he did not succeed, and kept dropping everymoment into brooding. When with a start he lifted his head again andlooked around, he forgot at once what he had just been thinkingabout and even where he was going. In this way he walked rightacross Vassilyevsky Ostrov, came out on to the Lesser Neva, crossedthe bridge and turned towards the islands. The greenness and freshnesswere at first restful to his weary eyes after the dust of the town andthe huge houses that hemmed him in and weighed upon him. Here therewere no taverns, no stifling closeness, no stench. But soon thesenew pleasant sensations passed into morbid irritability. Sometimeshe stood still before a brightly painted summer villa standing amonggreen foliage, he gazed through the fence, he saw in the distancesmartly dressed women on the verandahs and balconies, and childrenrunning in the gardens. The flowers especially caught his attention;he gazed at them longer than at anything. He was met, too, byluxurious carriages and by men and women on horseback; he watched themwith curious eyes and forgot about them before they had vanishedfrom his sight. Once he stood still and counted his money; he found hehad thirty copecks. "Twenty to the policeman, three to Nastasya forthe letter, so I must have given forty-seven or fifty to theMarmeladovs yesterday," he thought, reckoning it up for some unknownreason, but he soon forgot with what object he had taken the money outof his pocket. He recalled it on passing an eating-house or tavern,and felt that he was hungry.... Going into the tavern he drank a glassof vodka and ate a pie of some sort. He finished eating it as hewalked away. It was a long while since he had taken vodka and it hadan effect upon him at once, though he only drank a wine-glassful.His legs felt suddenly heavy and a great drowsiness came upon him.He turned homewards, but reaching Petrovsky Ostrov he stoppedcompletely exhausted, turned off the road into the bushes, sank downupon the grass and instantly fell asleep.

　　In a morbid condition of the brain, dreams often have a singularactuality, vividness, and extraordinary semblance of reality. At timesmonstrous images are created, but the setting and the whole pictureare so truthlike and filled with details so delicate, so unexpectedly,but so artistically consistent, that the dreamer, were he an artistlike Pushkin or Turgenev even, could never have invented them in thewaking state. Such sick dreams always remain long in the memory andmake a powerful impression on the overwrought and deranged nervoussystem.

　　Raskolnikov had a fearful dream. He dreamt he was back in hischildhood in the little town of his birth. He was a child aboutseven years old, walking into the country with his father on theevening of a holiday. It was a grey and heavy day, the country wasexactly as he remembered it; indeed he recalled it far more vividly inhis dream than he had done in memory. The little town stood on a levelflat as bare as the hand, not even a willow near it; only in the fardistance, a copse lay, a dark blur on the very edge of the horizon.A few paces beyond the last market garden stood a tavern, a bigtavern, which had always aroused in him a feeling of aversion, even offear, when he walked by it with his father. There was always a crowdthere, always shouting, laughter and abuse, hideous hoarse singing andoften fighting. Drunken and horrible-looking figures were hangingabout the tavern. He used to cling close to his father, tremblingall over when he met them. Near the tavern the road became a dustytrack, the dust of which was always black. It was a winding road,and about a hundred paces further on, it turned to the right to thegraveyard. In the middle of the graveyard stood a stone church witha green cupola where he used to go to mass two or three times a yearwith his father and mother, when a service was held in memory of hisgrandmother, who had long been dead, and whom he had never seen. Onthese occasions they used to take on a white dish tied up in a tablenapkin a special sort of rice pudding with raisins stuck in it inthe shape of a cross. He loved that church, the old-fashioned,unadorned ikons and the old priest with the shaking head. Near hisgrandmother's grave, which was marked by a stone, was the little graveof his younger brother who had died at six months old. He did notremember him at all, but he had been told about his little brother,and whenever he visited the graveyard he used religiously andreverently to cross himself and to bow down and kiss the little grave.And now he dreamt that he was walking with his father past thetavern on the way to the graveyard; he was holding his father's handand looking with dread at the tavern. A peculiar circumstanceattracted his attention: there seemed to be some kind of festivitygoing on, there were crowds of gaily dressed townspeople, peasantwomen, their husbands, and riff-raff of all sorts, all singing and allmore or less drunk. Near the entrance of the tavern stood a cart,but a strange cart. It was one of those big carts usually drawn byheavy cart-horses and laden with casks of wine or other heavy goods.He always liked looking at those great cart-horses, with their longmanes, thick legs, and slow even pace, drawing along a perfectmountain with no appearance of effort, as though it were easiergoing with a load than without it. But now, strange to say, in theshafts of such a cart he saw a thin little sorrel beast, one ofthose peasants' nags which he had often seen straining their utmostunder a heavy load of wood or hay, especially when the wheels werestuck in the mud or in a rut. And the peasants would be at them socruelly, sometimes even about the nose and eyes and he felt sosorry, so sorry for them that he almost cried, and his mother alwaysused to take him away from the window. All of a sudden there was agreat uproar of shouting, singing and the balalaika, and from thetavern a number of big and very drunken peasants came out, wearing redand blue shirts and coats thrown over their shoulders.

　　"Get in, get in!" shouted one of them, a young thick-neckedpeasant with a fleshy face red as a carrot. "I'll take you all, getin!"

　　But at once there was an outbreak of laughter and exclamations inthe crowd.

　　"Take us all with a beast like that!"

　　"Why, Mikolka, are you crazy to put a nag like that in such a cart?"

　　"And this mare is twenty if she is a day, mates!"

　　"Get in, I'll take you all," Mikolka shouted again, leaping firstinto the cart, seizing the reins and standing straight up in front."The bay has gone with Marvey," he shouted from the cart- "and thisbrute, mates, is just breaking my heart, I feel as if I could killher. She's just eating her head off. Get in, I tell you! I'll make hergallop! She'll gallop!" and he picked up the whip, preparing himselfwith relish to flog the little mare.

　　"Get in! Come along!" The crowd laughed. "D'you hear, she'llgallop!"

　　"Gallop indeed! She has not had a gallop in her for the last tenyears!"

　　"She'll jog along!"

　　"Don't you mind her, mates, bring a whip each of you, get ready!"

　　"All right! Give it to her!"

　　They all clambered into Mikolka's cart, laughing and making jokes.Six men got in and there was still room for more. They hauled in afat, rosy-cheeked woman. She was dressed in red cotton, in apointed, beaded headdress and thick leather shoes; she was crackingnuts and laughing. The crowd round them was laughing too and indeed,how could they help laughing? That wretched nag was to drag all thecartload of them at a gallop! Two young fellows in the cart werejust getting whips ready to help Mikolka. With the cry of "now," themare tugged with all her might, but far from galloping, could scarcelymove forward; she struggled with her legs, gasping and shrinkingfrom the blows of the three whips which were showered upon her likehail. The laughter in the cart and in the crowd was redoubled, butMikolka flew into a rage and furiously thrashed the mare, as though hesupposed she really could gallop.

　　"Let me get in, too, mates," shouted a young man in the crowdwhose appetite was aroused.

　　"Get in, all get in," cried Mikolka, "she will draw you all. I'llbeat her to death!" And he thrashed and thrashed at the mare, besidehimself with fury.

　　"Father, father," he cried, "father, what are they doing? Father,they are beating the poor horse!"

　　"Come along, come along!" said his father. "They are drunken andfoolish, they are in fun; come away, don't look!" and he tried to drawhim away, but he tore himself away from his hand, and, besidehimself with horror, ran to the horse. The poor beast was in a badway. She was gasping, standing still, then tugging again and almostfalling.

　　"Beat her to death," cried Mikolka, "it's come to that. I'll dofor her!"

　　"What are you about, are you a Christian, you devil?" shouted an oldman in the crowd.

　　"Did any one ever see the like? A wretched nag like that pullingsuch a cartload," said another.

　　"You'll kill her," shouted the third.

　　"Don't meddle! It's my property. I'll do what I choose. Get in, moreof you! Get in, all of you! I will have her go at a gallop!..."

　　All at once laughter broke into a roar and covered everything: themare, roused by the shower of blows, began feebly kicking. Even theold man could not help smiling. To think of a wretched little beastlike that trying to kick!

　　Two lads in the crowd snatched up whips and ran to the mare tobeat her about the ribs. One ran each side.

　　"Hit her in the face, in the eyes, in the eyes," cried Mikolka.

　　"Give us a song, mates," shouted some one in the cart and everyone in the cart joined in a riotous song, jingling a tambourine andwhistling. The woman went on cracking nuts and laughing.

　　...He ran beside the mare, ran in front of her, saw her beingwhipped across the eyes, right in the eyes! He was crying, he feltchoking, his tears were streaming. One of the men gave him a cutwith the whip across the face, he did not feel it. Wringing hishands and screaming, he rushed up to the grey-headed old man withthe grey beard, who was shaking his head in disapproval. One womanseized him by the hand and would have taken him away, but he torehimself from her and ran back to the mare. She was almost at thelast gasp, but began kicking once more.

　　"I'll teach you to kick," Mikolka shouted ferociously. He threw downthe whip, bent forward and picked up from the bottom of the cart along, thick shaft, he took hold of one end with both hands and with aneffort brandished it over the mare.

　　"He'll crush her," was shouted round him. "He'll kill her!"

　　"It's my property," shouted Mikolka and brought the shaft downwith a swinging blow. There was a sound of a heavy thud.

　　"Thrash her, thrash her! Why have you stopped?" shouted voices inthe crowd.

　　And Mikolka swung the shaft a second time and it fell a secondtime on the spine of the luckless mare. She sank back on her haunches,but lurched forward and tugged forward with all her force, tuggedfirst on one side and then on the other, trying to move the cart.But the six whips were attacking her in all directions, and theshaft was raised again and fell upon her a third time, then afourth, with heavy measured blows. Mikolka was in a fury that he couldnot kill her at one blow.

　　"She's a tough one," was shouted in the crowd.

　　"She'll fall in a minute, mates, there will soon be an end ofher," said an admiring spectator in the crowd.

　　"Fetch an axe to her! Finish her off," shouted a third.

　　"I'll show you! Stand off," Mikolka screamed frantically; he threwdown the shaft, stooped down in the cart and picked up an ironcrowbar. "Look out," he shouted, and with all his might he dealt astunning blow at the poor mare. The blow fell; the mare staggered,sank back, tried to pull, but the bar fell again with a swingingblow on her back and she fell on the ground like a log.

　　"Finish her off," shouted Mikolka and he leapt beside himself, outof the cart. Several young men, also flushed with drink, seizedanything they could come across- whips, sticks, poles, and ran tothe dying mare. Mikolka stood on one side and began dealing randomblows with the crowbar. The mare stretched out her head, drew a longbreath and died.

　　"You butchered her," some one shouted in the crowd.

　　"Why wouldn't she gallop then?"

　　"My property!" shouted Mikolka, with bloodshot eyes, brandishing thebar in his hands. He stood as though regretting that he had nothingmore to beat.

　　"No mistake about it, you are not a Christian," many voices wereshouting in the crowd.

　　But the poor boy, beside himself, made his way screaming through thecrowd to the sorrel nag, put his arms round her bleeding dead head andkissed it, kissed the eyes and kissed the lips.... Then he jumped upand flew in a frenzy with his little fists out at Mikolka. At thatinstant his father who had been running after him, snatched him up andcarried him out of the crowd.

　　"Come along, come! Let us go home," he said to him.

　　"Father! Why did they... kill... the poor horse!" he sobbed, but hisvoice broke and the words came in shrieks from his panting chest.

　　"They are drunk.... They are brutal... it's not our business!"said his father. He put his arms round his father but he feltchoked, choked. He tried to draw a breath, to cry out- and woke up.

　　He waked up, gasping for breath, his hair soaked withperspiration, and stood up in terror.

　　"Thank God, that was only a dream," he said, sitting down under atree and drawing deep breaths. "But what is it? Is it some fevercoming on? Such a hideous dream!"

　　He felt utterly broken; darkness and confusion were in his soul.He rested his elbows on his knees and leaned his head on his hands.

　　"Good God!" he cried, "can it be, can it be, that I shall reallytake an axe, that I shall strike her on the head, split her skullopen... that I shall tread in the sticky warm blood, break the lock,steal and tremble; hide, all spattered in the blood... with theaxe.... Good God, can it be?"

　　He was shaking like a leaf as he said this.

　　"But why am I going on like this?" he continued, sitting up again,as it were in profound amazement. "I knew that I could never bringmyself to it, so what have I been torturing myself for till now?Yesterday, yesterday, when I went to make that... experiment,yesterday I realised completely that I could never bear to do it....Why am I going over it again, then? Why am I hesitating? As I camedown the stairs yesterday, I said myself that it was base,loathsome, vile, vile... the very thought of it made me feel sickand filled me with horror.

　　"No, I couldn't do it, I couldn't do it! Granted, granted that thereis no flaw in all that reasoning, that all that I have concludedthis last month is clear as day, true as arithmetic.... My God! AnywayI couldn't bring myself to it! I couldn't do it, I couldn't do it!Why, why then am I still...?"

　　He rose to his feet, looked round in wonder as though surprised atfinding himself in this place, and went towards the bridge. He waspale, his eyes glowed, he was exhausted in every limb, but he seemedsuddenly to breathe more easily. He felt he had cast off thatfearful burden that had so long been weighing upon him, and all atonce there was a sense of relief and peace in his soul. "Lord," heprayed, "show me my path- I renounce that accursed... dream of mine."

　　Crossing the bridge, he gazed quietly and calmly at the Neva, at theglowing red sun setting in the glowing sky. In spite of his weaknesshe was not conscious of fatigue. It was as though an abscess thathad been forming for a month past in his heart had suddenly broken.Freedom, freedom! He was free from that spell, that sorcery, thatobsession!

　　Later on, when he recalled that time and all that happened to himduring those days, minute by minute, point by point, he wassuperstitiously impressed by one circumstance, which though initself not very exceptional, always seemed to him afterwards thepredestined turning-point of his fate. He could never understand andexplain to himself why, when he was tired and worn out, when itwould have been more convenient for him to go home by the shortest andmost direct way, he had returned by the Hay Market where he had noneed to go. It was obviously and quite unnecessarily out of his way,though not much so. It is true that it happened to him dozens of timesto return home without noticing what streets he passed through. Butwhy, he was always asking himself, why had such an important, such adecisive and at the same time such an absolutely chance meetinghappened in the Hay Market (where he had moreover no reason to go)at the very hour, the very minute of his life when he was just inthe very mood and in the very circumstances in which that meetingwas able to exert the gravest and most decisive influence on his wholedestiny? As though it had been lying in wait for him on purpose!

　　It was about nine o'clock when he crossed the Hay Market. At thetables and the barrows, at the booths and the shops, all the marketpeople were closing their establishments or clearing away andpacking up their wares and, like their customers, were going home.Ragpickers and costermongers of all kinds were crowding round thetaverns in the dirty and stinking courtyards of the Hay Market.Raskolnikov particularly liked this place and the neighbouring alleys,when he wandered aimlessly in the streets. Here his rags did notattract contemptuous attention, and one could walk about in any attirewithout scandalising people. At the corner of an alley a hucksterand his wife had two tables set out with tapes, thread, cottonhandkerchiefs, &c. They, too, had got up to go home, but werelingering in conversation with a friend, who had just come up to them.This friend was Lizaveta Ivanovna, or, as every one called her,Lizaveta, the younger sister of the old pawnbroker, Alyona Ivanovna,whom Raskolnikov had visited the previous day to pawn his watch andmake his experiment.... He already knew all about Lizaveta and sheknew him a little too. She was a single woman of about thirty-five,tall, clumsy, timid, submissive and almost idiotic. She was a completeslave and went in fear and trembling of her sister, who made herwork day and night, and even beat her. She was standing with abundle before the huckster and his wife, listening earnestly anddoubtfully. They were talking of something with special warmth. Themoment Raskolnikov caught sight of her, he was overcome by a strangesensation as it were of intense astonishment, though there was nothingastonishing about this meeting.

　　"You could make up your mind for yourself, Lizaveta Ivanovna," thehuckster was saying aloud. "Come round tomorrow about seven. They willbe here too."

　　"To-morrow?" said Lizaveta slowly and thoughtfully, as though unableto make up her mind.

　　"Upon my word, what a fright you are in of Alyona Ivanovna," gabbledthe huckster's wife, a lively little woman. "I look at you, you arelike some little babe. And she is not your own sister either-nothing but a stepsister and what a hand she keeps over you!"

　　"But this time don't say a word to Alyona Ivanovna," her husbandinterrupted; "that's my advice, but come round to us without asking.It will be worth your while. Later on your sister herself may have anotion."

　　"Am I to come?"

　　"About seven o'clock to-morrow. And they will be here. You will beable to decide for yourself."

　　"And we'll have a cup of tea," added his wife.

　　"All right, I'll come," said Lizaveta, still pondering, and shebegan slowly moving away.

　　Raskolnikov had just passed and heard no more. He passed softly,unnoticed, trying not to miss a word. His first amazement was followedby a thrill of horror, like a shiver running down his spine. He hadlearnt, he had suddenly quite unexpectedly learnt, that the next dayat seven o'clock Lizaveta, the old woman's sister and onlycompanion, would be away from home and that therefore at seven o'clockprecisely the old woman would be left alone.

　　He was only a few steps from his lodging. He went in like a mancondemned to death. He thought of nothing and was incapable ofthinking; but he felt suddenly in his whole being that he had nomore freedom of thought, no will, and that everything was suddenly andirrevocably decided.

　　Certainly, if he had to wait whole years for a suitable opportunity,he could not reckon on a more certain step towards the success ofthe plan than that which had just presented itself. In any case, itwould have been difficult to find out beforehand and with certainty,with greater exactness and less risk, and without dangerousinquiries and investigations, that next day at a certain time an oldwoman, on whose life an attempt was contemplated, would be at home andentirely alone.

　　Chapter Six

　　LATER on Raskolnikov happened to find out why the huckster and hiswife had invited Lizaveta. It was a very ordinary matter and there wasnothing exceptional about it. A family who had come to the town andbeen reduced to poverty were selling their household goods andclothes, all women's things. As the things would have fetched littlein the market, they were looking for a dealer. This was Lizaveta'sbusiness. She undertook such jobs and was frequently employed, asshe was very honest and always fixed a fair price and stuck to it. Shespoke as a rule little and, as we have said already, she was verysubmissive and timid.

　　But Raskolnikov had become superstitious of late. The traces ofsuperstition remained in him long after, and were almost ineradicable.And in all this he was always afterwards disposed to see somethingstrange and mysterious, as it were the presence of some peculiarinfluences and coincidences. In the previous winter a student heknew called Pokorev, who had left for Harkov, had chanced inconversation to give him the address of Alyona Ivanovna, the oldpawnbroker, in case he might want to pawn anything. For a long whilehe did not go to her, for he had lessons and managed to get alongsomehow. Six weeks ago he had remembered the address; he had twoarticles that could be pawned: his father's old silver watch and alittle gold ring with three red stones, a present from his sister atparting. He decided to take the ring. When he found the old woman hehad felt an insurmountable repulsion for her at the first glance,though he knew nothing special about her. He got two roubles fromher and went into a miserable little tavern on his way home. Heasked for tea, sat down and sank into deep thought. A strange idea waspecking at his brain like a chicken in the egg, and very, very muchabsorbed him.

　　Almost beside him at the next table there was sitting a student,whom he did not know and had never seen, and with him a young officer.They had played a game of billiards and began drinking tea. All atonce he heard the student mention to the officer the pawnbroker AlyonaIvanovna and give him her address. This of itself seemed strange toRaskolnikov; he had just come from her and here at once he heard hername. Of course it was a chance, but he could not shake off a veryextraordinary impression, and here some one seemed to be speakingexpressly for him; the student began telling his friend variousdetails about Alyona Ivanovna.

　　"She is first rate," he said. "You can always get money from her.She is as rich as a Jew, she can give you five thousand roubles at atime and she is not above taking a pledge for a rouble. Lots of ourfellows have had dealings with her. But she is an awful old harpy...."

　　And he began describing how spiteful and uncertain she was, how ifyou were only a day late with your interest the pledge was lost; howshe gave a quarter of the value of an article and took five and evenseven percent a month on it and so on. The student chattered on,saying that she had a sister Lizaveta, whom the wretched littlecreature was continually beating, and kept in complete bondage likea small child, though Lizaveta was at least six feet high.

　　"There's a phenomenon for you," cried the student and he laughed.

　　They began talking about Lizaveta. The student spoke about herwith a peculiar relish and was continually laughing and the officerlistened with great interest and asked him to send Lizaveta to do somemending for him. Raskolnikov did not miss a word and learnedeverything about her. Lizaveta was younger than the old woman andwas her half-sister, being the child of a different mother. She wasthirty-five. She worked day and night for her sister, and besidesdoing the cooking and the washing, she did sewing and worked as acharwoman and gave her sister all she earned. She did not dare toaccept an order or job of any kind without her sister's permission.The old woman had already made her will, and Lizaveta knew of it,and by this will she would not get a farthing; nothing but themovables, chairs and so on; all the money was left to a monastery inthe province of N___, that prayers might be said for her inperpetuity. Lizaveta was of lower rank than her sister, unmarriedand awfully uncouth in appearance, remarkably tall with long feet thatlooked as if they were bent outwards. She always wore batteredgoatskin shoes, and was clean in her person. What the studentexpressed most surprise and amusement about was the fact that Lizavetawas continually with child.

　　"But you say she is hideous?" observed the officer.

　　"Yes, she is so dark-skinned and looks like a soldier dressed up,but you know she is not at all hideous. She has such a good-naturedface and eyes. Strikingly so. And the proof of it is that lots ofpeople are attracted by her. She is such a soft, gentle creature,ready to put up with anything, always willing, willing to do anything.And her smile is really very sweet."

　　"You seem to find her attractive yourself," laughed the officer.

　　"From her queerness. No, I'll tell you what. I could kill thatdamned old woman and make off with her money, I assure you, withoutthe faintest conscience-prick," the student added with warmth. Theofficer laughed again while Raskolnikov shuddered. How strange it was!

　　"Listen, I want to ask you a serious question," the student saidhotly. "I was joking of course, but look here; on one side we have astupid, senseless, worthless, spiteful, ailing, horrid old woman,not simply useless but doing actual mischief, who has not an idea whatshe is living for herself, and who will die in a day or two in anycase. You understand? You understand?"

　　"Yes, yes, I understand," answered the officer, watching his excitedcompanion attentively.

　　"Well, listen then. On the other side, fresh young lives thrown awayfor want of help and by thousands, on every side! A hundred thousandgood deeds could be done and helped, on that old woman's money whichwill be buried in a monastery! Hundreds, thousands perhaps, might beset on the right path; dozens of families saved from destitution, fromruin, from vice, from the Lock hospitals- and all with her money. Killher, take her money and with the help of it devote oneself to theservice of humanity and the good of all. What do you think, wouldnot one tiny crime be wiped out by thousands of good deeds? For onelife thousands would be saved from corruption and decay. One death,and a hundred lives in exchange- it's simple arithmetic! Besides, whatvalue has the life of that sickly, stupid, ill-natured old woman inthe balance of existence! No more than the life of a louse, of a blackbeetle, less in fact because the old woman is doing harm. She iswearing out the lives of others; the other day she bit Lizaveta'sfinger out of spite; it almost had to be amputated."

　　"Of course she does not deserve to live," remarked the officer, "butthere it is, it's nature."

　　"Oh, well, brother, but we have to correct and direct nature, and,but for that, we should drown in an ocean of prejudice. But forthat, there would never have been a single great man. They talk ofduty, conscience- I don't want to say anything against duty andconscience;- but the point is what do we mean by them. Stay, I haveanother question to ask you. Listen!"

　　"No, you stay, I'll ask you a question. Listen!"

　　"Well?"

　　"You are talking and speechifying away, but tell me, would youkill the old woman yourself?"

　　"Of course not! I was only arguing the justice of it.... It'snothing to do with me...."

　　"But I think, if you would not do it yourself, there's no justiceabout it.... Let us have another game."

　　Raskolnikov was violently agitated. Of course, it was all ordinaryyouthful talk and thought, such as he had often heard before indifferent forms and on different themes. But why had he happened tohear such a discussion and such ideas at the very moment when hisown brain was just conceiving... the very same ideas? And why, just atthe moment when he had brought away the embryo of his idea from theold woman had he dropped at once upon a conversation about her? Thiscoincidence always seemed strange to him. This trivial talk in atavern had an immense influence on him in his later action; asthough there had really been in it something preordained, some guidinghint....-

　　On returning from the Hay Market he flung himself on the sofa andsat for a whole hour without stirring. Meanwhile it got dark; he hadno candle and, indeed, it did not occur to him to light up. He couldnever recollect whether he had been thinking about anything at thattime. At last he was conscious of his former fever and shivering,and he realised with relief that he could lie down on the sofa. Soonheavy, leaden sleep came over him, as it were crushing him.

　　He slept an extraordinarily long time and without dreaming.Nastasya, coming into his room at ten o'clock the next morning, haddifficulty in rousing him. She brought him in tea and bread. The teawas again the second brew and again in her own tea-pot.

　　"My goodness, how he sleeps!" she cried indignantly. "And he isalways asleep."

　　He got up with an effort. His head ached, he stood up, took a turnin his garret and sank back on the sofa again.

　　"Going to sleep again," cried Nastasya. "Are you ill, eh?"

　　He made no reply.

　　"Do you want some tea?"

　　"Afterwards," he said with an effort, closing his eyes again andturning to the wall.

　　Nastasya stood over him.

　　"Perhaps he really is ill," she said, turned and went out. Shecame in again at two o'clock with soup. He was lying as before. Thetea stood untouched. Nastasya felt positively offended and beganwrathfully rousing him.

　　"Why are you lying like a log?" she shouted, looking at him withrepulsion.

　　He got up, and sat down again, but said nothing and stared at thefloor.

　　"Are you ill or not?" asked Nastasya and again received no answer."You'd better go out and get a breath of air," she said after a pause."Will you eat it or not?"

　　"Afterwards," he said weakly. "You can go."

　　And he motioned her out.

　　She remained a little longer, looked at him with compassion and wentout.

　　A few minutes afterwards, he raised his eyes and looked for a longwhile at the tea and the soup. Then he took the bread, took up a spoonand began to eat.

　　He ate a little, three or four spoonfuls, without appetite as itwere mechanically. His head ached less. After his meal he stretchedhimself on the sofa again, but now he could not sleep; he laywithout stirring, with his face in the pillow. He was haunted bydaydreams and such strange daydreams; in one, that kept recurring,he fancied that he was in Africa, in Egypt, in some sort of oasis. Thecaravan was resting, the camels were peacefully lying down; thepalms stood all around in a complete circle; all the party were atdinner. But he was drinking water from a spring which flowedgurgling close by. And it was so cool, it was wonderful, wonderful,blue, cold water running among the parti-coloured stones and overthe clean sand which glistened here and there like gold.... Suddenlyhe heard a clock strike. He started, roused himself, raised hishead, looked out of the window, and seeing how late it was, suddenlyjumped up wide awake as though some one had pulled him off the sofa.He crept on tiptoe to the door, stealthily opened it and beganlistening on the staircase. His heart beat terribly. But all was quieton the stairs as if every one was asleep.... It seemed to himstrange and monstrous that he could have slept in such forgetfulnessfrom the previous day and had done nothing, had prepared nothingyet.... And meanwhile perhaps it had struck six. And his drowsinessand stupefaction were followed by an extraordinary, feverish, as itwere, distracted, haste. But the preparations to be made were few.He concentrated all his energies on thinking of everything andforgetting nothing; and his heart kept beating and thumping so that hecould hardly breathe. First he had to make a noose and sew it into hisovercoat- a work of a moment. He rummaged under his pillow andpicked out amongst the linen stuffed away under it, a worn out, oldunwashed shirt. From its rags he tore a long strip, a couple of incheswide and about sixteen inches long. He folded this strip in two,took off his wide, strong summer overcoat of some stout cottonmaterial (his only outer garment) and began sewing the two ends of therag on the inside, under the left armhole. His hands shook as hesewed, but he did it successfully so that nothing showed outsidewhen he put the coat on again. The needle and thread he had gotready long before and they lay on his table in a piece of paper. Asfor the noose, it was a very ingenious device of his own; the noosewas intended for the axe. It was impossible for him to carry the axethrough the street in his hands. And if hidden under his coat he wouldstill have had to support it with his hand, which would have beennoticeable. Now he had only to put the head of the axe in the noose,and it would hang quietly under his arm on the inside. Putting hishand in his coat pocket, he could hold the end of the handle all theway, so that it did not swing; and as the coat was very full, aregular sack in fact, it could not be seen from outside that he washolding something with the hand that was in the pocket. This noose,too, he had designed a fortnight before.

　　When he had finished with this, he thrust his hand into a littleopening between his sofa and the floor, fumbled in the left corner anddrew out the pledge, which he had got ready long before and hiddenthere. This pledge was, however, only a smoothly planed piece ofwood the size and thickness of a silver cigarette case. He picked upthis piece of wood in one of his wanderings in a courtyard where therewas some sort of a workshop. Afterwards he had added to the wood athin smooth piece of iron, which he had also picked up at the sametime in the street. Putting the iron which was a little the smaller onthe piece of wood, he fastened them very firmly, crossing andre-crossing the thread round them; then wrapped them carefully anddaintily in clean white paper and tied up the parcel so that itwould be very difficult to untie it. This was in order to divert theattention of the old woman for a time, while she was trying to undothe knot, and so to gain a moment. The iron strip was added to giveweight, so that the woman might not guess the first minute that the"thing" was made of wood. All this had been stored by him beforehandunder the sofa. He had only just got the pledge out when he heard someone suddenly about in the yard.

　　"It struck six long ago."

　　"Long ago! My God!"

　　He rushed to the door, listened, caught up his hat and began todescend his thirteen steps cautiously, noiselessly, like a cat. He hadstill the most important thing to do- to steal the axe from thekitchen. That the deed must be done with an axe he had decided longago. He had also a pocket pruning-knife, but he could not rely onthe knife and still less on his own strength, and so resolvedfinally on the axe. We may note in passing, one peculiarity inregard to all the final resolutions taken by him in the matter; theyhad one strange characteristic: the more final they were, the morehideous and the more absurd they at once became in his eyes. Inspite of all his agonising inward struggle, he never for a singleinstant all that time could believe in the carrying out of his plans.

　　And, indeed, if it had ever happened that everything to the leastpoint could have been considered and finally settled, and nouncertainty of any kind had remained, he would, it seems, haverenounced it all as something absurd, monstrous and impossible. Buta whole mass of unsettled points and uncertainties remained. As forgetting the axe, that trifling business cost him no anxiety, fornothing could be easier. Nastasya was continually out of the house,especially in the evenings; she would run in to the neighbours or to ashop, and always left the door ajar. It was the one thing the landladywas always scolding her about. And so when the time came, he wouldonly have to go quietly into the kitchen and to take the axe, and anhour later (when everything was over) go in and put it back again. Butthese were doubtful points. Supposing he returned an hour later to putit back, and Nastasya had come back and was on the spot. He would ofcourse have to go by and wait till she went out again. But supposingshe were in the meantime to miss the axe, look for it, make an outcry-that would mean suspicion or at least grounds for suspicion.

　　But those were all trifles which he had not even begun toconsider, and indeed he had no time. He was thinking of the chiefpoint, and put off trifling details, until he could believe in it all.But that seemed utterly unattainable. So it seemed to himself atleast. He could not imagine, for instance, that he would sometimeleave off thinking, get up and simply go there.... Even his lateexperiment (i.e. his visit with the object of a final survey of theplace) was simply an attempt at an experiment, far from being the realthing, as though one should say "come, let us go and try it- why dreamabout it!"- and at once he had broken down and had run away cursing,in a frenzy with himself. Meanwhile it would seem, as regards themoral question, that his analysis was complete; his casuistry hadbecome keen as a razor, and he could not find rational objections inhimself. But in the last resort he simply ceased to believe inhimself, and doggedly, slavishly sought arguments in all directions,fumbling for them, as though some one were forcing and drawing himto it.

　　At first- long before indeed- he had been much occupied with onequestion; why almost all crimes are so badly concealed and so easilydetected, and why almost all criminals leave such obvious traces? Hehad come gradually to many different and curious conclusions, and inhis opinion the chief reason lay not so much in the materialimpossibility of concealing the crime, as in the criminal himself.Almost every criminal is subject to a failure of will and reasoningpower by a childish and phenomenal heedlessness, at the very instantwhen prudence and caution are most essential. It was his convictionthat this eclipse of reason and failure of will power attacked a manlike a disease, developed gradually and reached its highest point justbefore the perpetration of the crime, continued with equal violence atthe moment of the crime and for longer or shorter time after,according to the individual case, and then passed off like any otherdisease. The question whether the disease gives rise to the crime,or whether the crime from its own peculiar nature is alwaysaccompanied by something of the nature of disease, he did not yet feelable to decide.

　　When he reached these conclusions, he decided that in his own casethere could not be such a morbid reaction, that his reason and willwould remain unimpaired at the time of carrying out his design, forthe simple reason that his design was "not a crime...." We will omitall the process by means of which he arrived at this lastconclusion; we have run too far ahead already.... We may add only thatthe practical, purely material difficulties of the affair occupied asecondary position in his mind. "One has but to keep all one's willpower and reason to deal with them, and they will all be overcome atthe time when once one has familiarised oneself with the minutestdetails of the business...." But this preparation had never beenbegun. His final decisions were what he came to trust least, andwhen the hour struck, it all came to pass quite differently, as itwere accidentally and unexpectedly.

　　One trifling circumstance upset his calculations, before he had evenleft the staircase. When he reached the landlady's kitchen, the doorof which was open as usual, he glanced cautiously in to see whether,in Nastasya's absence, the landlady herself was there, or if not,whether the door to her own room was closed, so that she might notpeep out when he went in for the axe. But what was his amazementwhen he suddenly saw that Nastasya was not only at home in thekitchen, but was occupied there, taking linen out of a basket andhanging it on a line. Seeing him, she left off hanging the clothes,turned to him and stared at him all the time he was passing. He turnedaway his eyes, and walked past as though he noticed nothing. But itwas the end of everything; he had not the axe! He was overwhelmed.

　　"What made me think," he reflected, as he went under the gateway,"what made me think that she would be sure not to be at home at thatmoment! Why, why, why did I assume this so certainly?"

　　He was crushed and even humiliated. He could have laughed at himselfin his anger.... A dull animal rage boiled within him.

　　He stood hesitating in the gateway. To go into the street, to go fora walk for appearance sake was revolting; to go back to his room, evenmore revolting. "And what a chance I have lost for ever!" he muttered,standing aimlessly in the gateway, just opposite the porter's littledark room, which was also open. Suddenly he started. From the porter'sroom, two paces away from him, something shining under the bench tothe right caught his eye.... He looked about him- nobody. Heapproached the room on tiptoe, went down two steps into it and in afaint voice called the porter. "Yes, not at home! Somewhere nearthough, in the yard, for the door is wide open." He dashed to theaxe (it was an axe) and pulled it out from under the bench, where itlay between two chunks of wood; at once before going out, he made itfast in the noose, he thrust both hands into his pockets and wentout of the room; no one had noticed him! "When reason fails, the devilhelps!" he thought with a strange grin. This chance raised his spiritsextraordinarily.

　　He walked along quietly and sedately, without hurry, to avoidawakening suspicion. He scarcely looked at the passers-by, tried toescape looking at their faces at all, and to be as little noticeableas possible. Suddenly he thought of his hat. "Good heavens! I hadthe money the day before yesterday and did not get a cap to wearinstead!" A curse rose from the bottom of his soul.

　　Glancing out of the corner of his eye into a shop, he saw by a clockon the wall that it was ten minutes past seven. He had to make hasteand at the same time to go someway round, so as to approach thehouse from the other side....

　　When he had happened to imagine all this beforehand, he hadsometimes thought that he would be very much afraid. But he was notvery much afraid now, was not afraid at all, indeed. His mind was evenoccupied by irrelevant matters, but by nothing for long. As hepassed the Yusupov garden, he was deeply absorbed in considering thebuilding of great fountains, and of their refreshing effect on theatmosphere in all the squares. By degrees he passed to theconviction that if the summer garden were extended to the field ofMars, and perhaps joined to the garden of the Mihailovsky Palace, itwould be a splendid thing and a great benefit to the town. Then he wasinterested by the question why in all great towns men are not simplydriven by necessity, but in some peculiar way inclined to live inthose parts of the town where there are no gardens nor fountains;where there is most dirt and smell and all sorts of nastiness. Thenhis own walks through the Hay Market came back to his mind, and fora moment he waked up to reality. "What nonsense!" he thought,"better think of nothing at all!"

　　"So probably men led to execution clutch mentally at every objectthat meets them on the way," flashed through his mind, but simplyflashed, like lightning; he made haste to dismiss this thought.... Andby now he was near; here was the house, here was the gate. Suddenlya clock somewhere struck once. "What! can it be half-past seven?Impossible, it must be fast!"

　　Luckily for him, everything went well again at the gates. At thatvery moment, as though expressly for his benefit, a huge waggon of hayhad just driven in at the gate, completely screening him as hepassed under the gateway, and the waggon had scarcely had time todrive through into the yard, before he had slipped in a flash to theright. On the other side of the waggon he could hear shouting andquarrelling; but no one noticed him and no one met him. Many windowslooking into that huge quadrangular yard were open at that moment, buthe did not raise his head- he had not the strength to. The staircaseleading to the old woman's room was close by, just on the right of thegateway. He was already on the stairs....

　　Drawing a breath, pressing his hand against his throbbing heart, andonce more feeling for the axe and setting it straight, he began softlyand cautiously ascending the stairs, listening every minute. But thestairs, too, were quite deserted; all the doors were shut; he met noone. One flat indeed on the first floor was wide open and painterswere at work in it, but they did not glance at him. He stood still,thought a minute and went on. "Of course it would be better if theyhad not been here, but... it's two storeys above them."

　　And there was the fourth storey, here was the door, here was theflat opposite, the empty one. The flat underneath the old woman'swas apparently empty also; the visiting card nailed on the door hadbeen torn off- they had gone away!... He was out of breath. For oneinstant the thought floated through his mind "Shall I go back?" But hemade no answer and began listening at the old woman's door, a deadsilence. Then he listened again on the staircase, listened long andintently... then looked about him for the last time, pulled himselftogether, drew himself up, and once more tried the axe in the noose."Am I very pale?" he wondered. "Am I not evidently agitated? She ismistrustful.... Had I better wait a little longer... till my heartleaves off thumping?"

　　But his heart did not leave off. On the contrary, as though to spitehim, it throbbed more and more violently. He could stand it no longer,he slowly put out his hand to the bell and rang. Half a minute laterhe rang again, more loudly.

　　No answer. To go on ringing was useless and out of place. The oldwoman was, of course, at home, but she was suspicious and alone. Hehad some knowledge of her habits... and once more he put his ear tothe door. Either his senses were peculiarly keen (which it isdifficult to suppose), or the sound was really very distinct.Anyway, he suddenly heard something like the cautious touch of ahand on the lock and the rustle of a skirt at the very door. Someone was standing stealthily close to the lock and just as he was doingon the outside was secretly listening within, and seemed to have herear to the door.... He moved a little on purpose and mutteredsomething aloud that he might not have the appearance of hiding,then rang a third time, but quietly, soberly and without impatience,Recalling it afterwards, that moment stood out in his mind vividly,distinctly, forever; he could not make out how he had had suchcunning, for his mind was as it were clouded at moments and he wasalmost unconscious of his body.... An instant later he heard the latchunfastened.

　　Chapter Seven

　　THE DOOR was as before opened a tiny crack, and again two sharpand suspicious eyes stared at him out of the darkness. ThenRaskolnikov lost his head and nearly made a great mistake.

　　Fearing the old woman would be frightened by their being alone,and not hoping that the sight of him would disarm her suspicions, hetook hold of the door and drew it towards him to prevent the old womanfrom attempting to shut it again. Seeing this she did not pull thedoor back, but she did not let go the handle so that he almost draggedher out with it on to the stairs. Seeing that she was standing inthe doorway not allowing him to pass, he advanced straight upon her.She stepped back in alarm, tried to say something, but seemed unableto speak and stared with open eyes at him.

　　"Good evening, Alyona Ivanovna," he began, trying to speak easily,but his voice would not obey him, it broke and shook. "I havecome... I have brought something... but we'd better come in... tothe light...."

　　And leaving her, he passed straight into the room uninvited. The oldwoman ran after him; her tongue was unloosed.

　　"Good heavens! What it is? Who is it? What do you want?"

　　"Why, Alyona Ivanovna, you know me... Raskolnikov... here, I broughtyou the pledge I promised the other day..." and he held out thepledge.

　　The old woman glanced for a moment at the pledge, but at once staredin the eyes of her uninvited visitor. She looked intently, maliciouslyand mistrustfully. A minute passed; he even fancied something like asneer in her eyes, as though she had already guessed everything. Hefelt that he was losing his head, that he was almost frightened, sofrightened that if she were to look like that and not say a word foranother half minute, he thought he would have run away from her.

　　"Why do you look at me as though you did not know me?" he saidsuddenly, also with malice. "Take it if you like, if not I'll goelsewhere, I am in a hurry."

　　He had not even thought of saying this, but it was suddenly saidof itself. The old woman recovered herself, and her visitor's resolutetone evidently restored her confidence.

　　"But why, my good sir, all of a minute.... What is it?" she asked,looking at the pledge.

　　"The silver cigarette case; I spoke of it last time, you know."

　　She held out her hand.

　　"But how pale you are, to be sure... and your hands are tremblingtoo? Have you been bathing, or what?"

　　"Fever," he answered abruptly. "You can't help getting pale... ifyou've nothing to eat," he added, with difficulty articulating thewords.

　　His strength was failing him again. But his answer sounded likethe truth; the old woman took the pledge.

　　"What is it?" she asked once more, scanning Raskolnikov intently,and weighing the pledge in her hand.

　　"A thing... cigarette case.... Silver.... Look at it."

　　"It does not seem somehow like silver.... How he has wrapped it up!"

　　Trying to untie the string and turning to the window, to the light(all her windows were shut, in spite of the stifling heat), she lefthim altogether for some seconds and stood with her back to him. Heunbuttoned his coat and freed the axe from the noose, but did notyet take it out altogether, simply holding it in his right handunder the coat. His hands were fearfully weak, he felt them everymoment growing more numb and more wooden. He was afraid he would letthe axe slip and fall.... A sudden giddiness came over him.

　　"But what has he tied it up like this for?" the old woman cried withvexation and moved towards him.

　　He had not a minute more to lose. He pulled the axe quite out, swungit with both arms, scarcely conscious of himself, and almost withouteffort, almost mechanically, brought the blunt side down on herhead. He seemed not to use his own strength in this. But as soon as hehad once brought the axe down, his strength returned to him.

　　The old woman was as always bareheaded. Her thin, light hair,streaked with grey, thickly smeared with grease, was plaited in arat's tail and fastened by a broken horn comb which stood out on thenape of her neck. As she was so short, the blow fell on the very topof her skull. She cried out, but very faintly, and suddenly sank allof a heap on the floor, raising her hands to her head. In one hand shestill held "the pledge." Then he dealt her another and another blowwith the blunt side and on the same spot. The blood gushed as froman overturned glass, the body fell back. He stepped back, let it fall,and at once bent over her face; she was dead. Her eyes seemed to bestarting out of their sockets, the brow and the whole face weredrawn and contorted convulsively.

　　He laid the axe on the ground near the dead body and felt at once inher pocket (trying to avoid the streaming body)- the same right handpocket from which she had taken the key on his last visit. He was infull possession of his faculties, free from confusion or giddiness,but his hands were still trembling. He remembered afterwards that hehad been particularly collected and careful, trying all the time notto get smeared with blood.... He pulled out the keys at once, theywere all, as before, in one bunch on a steel ring. He ran at once intothe bedroom with them. It was a very small room with a whole shrine ofholy images. Against the other wall stood a big bed, very clean andcovered with a silk patchwork wadded quilt. Against a third wall was achest of drawers. Strange to say, so soon as he began to fit thekeys into the chest, so soon as he heard their jingling, aconvulsive shudder passed over him. He suddenly felt tempted againto give it all up and go away. But that was only for an instant; itwas too late to go back. He positively smiled at himself, whensuddenly another terrifying idea occurred to his mind. He suddenlyfancied that the old woman might be still alive and might recoverher senses. Leaving the keys in the chest, he ran back to the body,snatched up the axe and lifted it once more over the old woman, butdid not bring it down. There was no doubt that she was dead. Bendingdown and examining her again more closely, he saw clearly that theskull was broken and even battered in on one side. He was about tofeel it with his finger, but drew back his hand and indeed it wasevident without that. Meanwhile there was a perfect pool of blood. Allat once he noticed a string on her neck; he tugged at it, but thestring was strong and did not snap and besides, it was soaked withblood. He tried to pull it out from the front of the dress, butsomething held it and prevented its coming. In his impatience heraised the axe again to cut the string from above on the body, but didnot dare, and with difficulty, smearing his hand and the axe in theblood, after two minutes' hurried effort, he cut the string and tookit off without touching the body with the axe; he was not mistaken- itwas a purse. On the string were two crosses, one of Cyprus wood andone of copper, and an image in silver filigree, and with them asmall greasy chamois leather purse with a steel rim and ring. Thepurse was stuffed very full; Raskolnikov thrust it in his pocketwithout looking at it, flung the crosses on the old woman's body andrushed back into the bedroom, this time taking the axe with him.

　　He was in terrible haste, he snatched the keys, and began tryingthem again. But he was unsuccessful. They would not fit in thelocks. It was not so much that his hands were shaking, but that hekept making mistakes; though he saw for instance that a key was notthe right one and would not fit, still he tried to put it in. Suddenlyhe remembered and realised that the big key with the deep notches,which was hanging there with the small keys could not possiblybelong to the chest of drawers (on his last visit this had struckhim), but to some strong box, and that everything perhaps was hiddenin that box. He left the chest of drawers, and at once felt underthe bedstead, knowing that old women usually keep boxes under theirbeds. And so it was; there was a good-sized box under the bed, atleast a yard in length, with an arched lid covered with red leatherand studded with steel nails. The notched key fitted at once andunlocked it. At the top, under a white sheet, was a coat of redbrocade lined with hareskin; under it was a silk dress, then a shawland it seemed as though there was nothing below but clothes. The firstthing he did was to wipe his blood-stained hands on the red brocade."It's red, and on red blood will be less noticeable," the thoughtpassed through his mind; then he suddenly came to himself. "GoodGod, am I going out of my senses?" he thought with terror.

　　But no sooner did he touch the clothes than a gold watch slippedfrom under the fur coat. He made haste to turn them all over. Thereturned out to be various articles made of gold among theclothes-probably all pledges, unredeemed or waiting to be redeemed-bracelets, chains, ear-rings, pins and such things. Some were incases, others simply wrapped in newspaper, carefully and exactlyfolded, and tied round with tape. Without any delay, he beganfilling up the pockets of his trousers and overcoat withoutexamining or undoing the parcels and cases; but he had not time totake many....

　　He suddenly heard steps in the room where the old woman lay. Hestopped short and was still as death. But all was quiet, so it musthave been his fancy. All at once he heard distinctly a faint cry, asthough some one had uttered a low broken moan. Then again dead silencefor a minute or two. He sat squatting on his heels by the box andwaited holding his breath. Suddenly he jumped up, seized the axe andran out of the bedroom.

　　In the middle of the room stood Lizaveta with a big bundle in herarms. She was gazing in stupefaction at her murdered sister, whiteas a sheet and seeming not to have the strength to cry out. Seeing himrun out of the bedroom, she began faintly quivering all over, like aleaf, a shudder ran down her face; she lifted her hand, opened hermouth, but still did not scream. She began slowly backing away fromhim into the corner, staring intently, persistently at him, butstill uttered no sound, as though she could not get breath toscream. He rushed at her with the axe; her mouth twitched piteously,as one sees babies' mouths, when they begin to be frightened, stareintently at what frightens them and are on the point of screaming. Andthis hapless Lizaveta was so simple and had been so thoroughly crushedand scared that she did not even raise a hand to guard her face,though that was the most necessary and natural action at the moment,for the axe was raised over her face. She only put up her empty lefthand, but not to her face, slowly holding it out before her asthough motioning him away. The axe fell with the sharp edge just onthe skull and split at one blow all the top of the head. She fellheavily at once. Raskolnikov completely lost his head, snatched up herbundle, dropped it again and ran into the entry.

　　Fear gained more and more mastery over him, especially after thissecond, quite unexpected murder. He longed to run away from theplace as fast as possible. And if at that moment he had been capableof seeing and reasoning more correctly, if he had been able to realiseall the difficulties of his position, the hopelessness, thehideousness and the absurdity of it, if he could have understood howmany obstacles and, perhaps, crimes he had still to overcome or tocommit, to get out of that place and to make his way home, it isvery possible that he would have flung up everything, and would havegone to give himself up, and not from fear, but from simple horror andloathing of what he had done. The feeling of loathing especiallysurged up within him and grew stronger every minute. He would notnow have gone to the box or even into the room for anything in theworld.

　　But a sort of blankness, even dreaminess had begun by degrees totake possession of him; at moments he forgot himself, or rather,forgot what was of importance, and caught at trifles. Glancing,however, into the kitchen and seeing a bucket half full of water ona bench, he bethought him of washing his hands and the axe. Hishands were sticky with blood. He dropped the axe with the blade in thewater, snatched a piece of soap that lay in a broken saucer on thewindow, and began washing his hands in the bucket. When they wereclean, he took out the axe, washed the blade and spent a long time,about three minutes, washing the wood where there were spots ofblood rubbing them with soap. Then he wiped it all with some linenthat was hanging to dry on a line in the kitchen and then he was along while attentively examining the axe at the window. There was notrace left on it, only the wood was still damp. He carefully hungthe axe in the noose under his coat. Then as far as was possible, inthe dim light in the kitchen, he looked over his overcoat, histrousers and his boots. At the first glance there seemed to be nothingbut stains on the boots. He wetted the rag and rubbed the boots. Buthe knew he was not looking thoroughly, that there might be somethingquite noticeable that he was overlooking. He stood in the middle ofthe room, lost in thought. Dark agonising ideas rose in his mind-the idea that he was mad and that at that moment he was incapable ofreasoning, of protecting himself, that he ought perhaps to be doingsomething utterly different from what he was now doing. "Good God!" hemuttered "I must fly, fly," and he rushed into the entry. But here ashock of terror awaited him such as he had never known before.

　　He stood and gazed and could not believe his eyes: the door, theouter door from the stairs, at which he had not long before waited andrung, was standing unfastened and at least six inches open. No lock,no bolt, all the time, all that time! The old woman had not shut itafter him perhaps as a precaution. But, good God! Why, he had seenLizaveta afterwards! And how could he, how could he have failed toreflect that she must have come in somehow! She could not have comethrough the wall!

　　He dashed to the door and fastened the latch.

　　"But no, the wrong thing again. I must get away, get away...."

　　He unfastened the latch, opened the door and began listening onthe staircase.

　　He listened a long time. Somewhere far away, it might be in thegateway, two voices were loudly and shrilly shouting, quarrellingand scolding. "What are they about?" He waited patiently. At lastall was still, as though suddenly cut off; they had separated. Hewas meaning to go out, but suddenly, on the floor below, a door wasnoisily opened and some one began going downstairs humming a tune."How is it they all make such a noise!" flashed through his mind. Oncemore he closed the door and waited. At last all was still, not asoul stirring. He was just taking a step towards the stairs when heheard fresh footsteps.

　　The steps sounded very far off, at the very bottom of the stairs,but he remembered quite clearly and distinctly that from the firstsound he began for some reason to suspect that this was some onecoming there, to the fourth floor, to the old woman. Why? Were thesounds somehow peculiar, significant? The steps were heavy, even andunhurried. Now he had passed the first floor, now he was mountinghigher, it was growing more and more distinct! He could hear his heavybreathing. And now the third storey had been reached. Coming here! Andit seemed to him all at once that he was turned to stone, that itwas like a dream in which one is being pursued, nearly caught and willbe killed, and is rooted to the spot and cannot even move one's arms.

　　At last when the unknown was mounting to the fourth floor, hesuddenly started, and succeeded in slipping neatly and quickly backinto the flat and closing the door behind him. Then he took the hookand softly, noiselessly, fixed it in the catch. Instinct helped him.When he had done this, he crouched holding his breath, by the door.The unknown visitor was by now also at the door. They were nowstanding opposite one another, as he had just before been standingwith the old woman, when the door divided them and he was listening.

　　The visitor panted several times. "He must be a big, fat man,"thought Raskolnikov, squeezing the axe in his hand. It seemed like adream indeed. The visitor took hold of the bell and rang loudly.

　　As soon as the tin bell tinkled, Raskolnikov seemed to be aware ofsomething moving in the room. For some seconds he listened quiteseriously. The unknown rang again, waited and suddenly tuggedviolently and impatiently at the handle of the door. Raskolnikov gazedin horror at the hook shaking in its fastening, and in blank terrorexpected every minute that the fastening would be pulled out. Itcertainly did seem possible, so violently was he shaking it. He wastempted to hold the fastening, but he might be aware of it. Agiddiness came over him again. "I shall fall down!" flashed throughhis mind, but the unknown began to speak and he recovered himself atonce.

　　"What's up? Are they asleep or murdered? D-damn them!" he bawledin a thick voice, "Hey, Alyona Ivanovna, old witch! Lizaveta Ivanovna,hey, my beauty! open the door! Oh, damn them! Are they asleep orwhat?"

　　And again, enraged, he tugged with all his might a dozen times atthe bell. He must certainly be a man of authority and an intimateacquaintance.

　　At this moment light hurried steps were heard not far off, on thestairs. Some one else was approaching. Raskolnikov had not heardthem at first.

　　"You don't say there's no one at home," the new-comer cried in acheerful, ringing voice, addressing the first visitor, who stillwent on pulling the bell. "Good evening, Koch."

　　"From his voice he must be quite young," thought Raskolnikov.

　　"Who the devil can tell? I've almost broken the lock," answeredKoch. "But how do you come to know me?

　　"Why! The day before yesterday I beat you three times running atbilliards at Gambrinus'."

　　"Oh!"

　　"So they are not at home? That's queer? It's awfully stupidthough. Where could the old woman have gone? I've come on business."

　　"Yes; and I have business with her, too."

　　"Well, what can we do? Go back, I suppose, Aie-aie! And I was hopingto get some money!" cried the young man.

　　"We must give it up, of course, but what did she fix this timefor? The old witch fixed the time for me to come herself. It's outof my way. And where the devil she can have got to, I can't makeout. She sits here from year's end to year's end, the old hag; herlegs are bad and yet here all of a sudden she is out for a walk!"

　　"Hadn't we better ask the porter?"

　　"What?"

　　"Where she's gone and when she'll be back."

　　"Hm.... Damn it all!... We might ask.... But you know she never doesgo anywhere."

　　And he once more tugged at the door-handle.

　　"Damn it all. There's nothing to be done, we must go!"

　　"Stay!" cried the young man suddenly. "Do you see how the doorshakes if you pull it?"

　　"Well?"

　　"That shows it's not locked, but fastened with the hook! Do you hearhow the hook clanks?"

　　"Well?"

　　"Why, don't you see? That proves that one of them is at home. Ifthey were all out, they would have locked the door from the outsidewith the key and not with the hook from inside. There, do you hear howthe hook is clanking? To fasten the hook on the inside they must be athome, don't you see. So there they are sitting inside and don't openthe door!"

　　"Well! And so they must be!" cried Koch, astonished. "What arethey about in there!" And he began furiously shaking the door.

　　"Stay!" cried the young man again. "Don't pull at it! There mustbe something wrong..... Here, you've been ringing and pulling at thedoor and still they don't open! So either they've both fainted or..."

　　"What?"

　　"I tell you what. Let's go fetch the porter, let him wake them up."

　　"All right."

　　Both were going down.

　　"Stay. You stop here while I run down for the porter."

　　"What for?"

　　"Well, you'd better."

　　"All right."

　　"I'm studying the law you see! It's evident, e-vi-dent there'ssomething wrong here!" the young man cried hotly, and he randownstairs.

　　Koch remained. Once more he softly touched the bell which gave onetinkle, then gently, as though reflecting and looking about him, begantouching the door-handle pulling it and letting it go to make sureonce more that it was only fastened by the hook. Then puffing andpanting he bent down and began looking at the keyhole; but the key wasin the lock on the inside and so nothing could be seen.

　　Raskolnikov stood keeping tight hold of the axe. He was in a sort ofdelirium. He was even making ready to fight when they should comein. While they were knocking and talking together, the idea severaltimes occurred to him to end it all at once and shout to themthrough the door. Now and then he was tempted to swear at them, tojeer at them, while they could not open the door! "Only make haste!"was the thought that flashed through his mind.

　　"But what the devil is he about?..." Time was passing, one minute,and another- no one came. Koch began to be restless.

　　"What the devil?" he cried suddenly and in impatience desertinghis sentry duty, he, too, went down, hurrying and thumping his heavyboots on the stairs. The steps died away.

　　"Good heavens! What am I to do?"

　　Raskolnikov unfastened the hook, opened the door- there was nosound. Abruptly, without any thought at all, he went out, closingthe door as thoroughly as he could, and went downstairs.

　　He had gone down three flights when he suddenly heard a loud voicebelow- where could he go! There was nowhere to hide. He was just goingback to the flat.

　　"Hey there! Catch the brute!"

　　Somebody dashed out of a flat below, shouting, and rather fellthan ran down the stairs, bawling at the top of his voice.

　　"Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Mitka! Blast him!"

　　The shout ended in a shriek; the last sounds came from the yard; allwas still. But at the same instant several men talking loud and fastbegan noisily mounting the stairs. There were three or four of them.He distinguished the ringing voice of the young man. "They!"

　　Filled with despair he went straight to meet them, feeling "comewhat must!" If they stopped him- all was lost; if they let him pass-all was lost too; they would remember him. They were approaching; theywere only a flight from him- and suddenly deliverance! A few stepsfrom him on the right, there was an empty flat with the door wideopen, the flat on the second floor where the painters had been atwork, and which, as though for his benefit, they had just left. It wasthey, no doubt, who had just run down, shouting. The floor had onlyjust been painted, in the middle of the room stood a pail and a brokenpot with paint and brushes. In one instant he had whisked in at theopen door and hidden behind the wall and only in the nick of time;they had already reached the landing. Then they turned and went onup to the fourth floor, talking loudly. He waited, went out ontiptoe and ran down the stairs.

　　No one was on the stairs, nor in the gateway. He passed quicklythrough the gateway and turned to the left in the street.

　　He knew, he knew perfectly well that at that moment they were at theflat, that they were greatly astonished at finding it unlocked, as thedoor had just been fastened, that by now they were looking at thebodies, that before another minute had passed they would guess andcompletely realise that the murderer had just been there, and hadsucceeded in hiding somewhere, slipping by them and escaping. Theywould guess most likely that he had been in the empty flat, while theywere going upstairs. And meanwhile he dared not quicken his pace much,though the next turning was still nearly a hundred yards away. "Shouldhe slip through some gateway and wait somewhere in an unknownstreet? No, hopeless! Should he fling away the axe? Should he take acab? Hopeless, hopeless!"

　　At last he reached the turning. He turned down it more dead thanalive. Here he was half way to safety, and here understood it; itwas less risky because there was a great crowd of people, and he waslost in it like a grain of sand. But all he had suffered had soweakened him that he could scarcely move. Perspiration ran down him indrops, his neck was all wet. "My word, he has been going it!" some oneshouted at him when he came out on the canal bank.

　　He was only dimly conscious of himself now, and the farther hewent the worse it was. He remembered however, that on coming out on tothe canal bank, he was alarmed at finding few people there and sobeing more conspicuous, and he had thought of turning back. Thoughhe was almost falling from fatigue, he went a long way round so asto get home from quite a different direction.

　　He was not fully conscious when he passed through the gateway of hishouse! he was already on the staircase before he recollected theaxe. And yet he had a very grave problem before him, to put it backand to escape observation as far as possible in doing so. He was ofcourse incapable of reflecting that it might perhaps be far better notto restore the axe at all, but to drop it later on in somebody's yard.But it all happened fortunately, the door of the porter's room wasclosed but not locked, so that it seemed most likely that the porterwas at home. But he had so completely lost all power of reflectionthat he walked straight to the door and opened it. If the porter hadasked him "What do you want?" he would perhaps have simply handedhim the axe. But again the porter was not at home, and he succeeded inputting the axe back under the bench, and even covering it with thechunk of wood as before. He met no one, not a soul, afterwards onthe way to his room; the landlady's door was shut. When he was inhis room, he flung himself on the sofa just as he was- he did notsleep, but sank into blank forgetfulness. If any one had come into hisroom then, he would have jumped up at once and screamed. Scraps andshreds of thoughts were simply swarming in his brain, but he could notcatch at one, he could not rest on one, in spite of all hisefforts....

　　PART TWO

　　Chapter One

　　SO HE lay a very long while. Now and then he seemed to wake up,and at such moments he noticed that it was far into the night, butit did not occur to him to get up. At last he noticed that it wasbeginning to get light. He was lying on his back, still dazed from hisrecent oblivion. Fearful, despairing cries rose shrilly from thestreet, sounds which he heard every night, indeed, under his windowafter two o'clock. They woke him up now.

　　"Ah! the drunken men are coming out of the taverns," he thought,"it's past two o'clock," and at once he leaped up, as though someone had pulled him from the sofa.

　　"What! Past two o'clock!"

　　He sat down on the sofa- and instantly recollected everything! Allat once, in one flash, he recollected everything.

　　For the first moment he thought he was going mad. A dreadful chillcame over him; but the chill was from the fever that had begun longbefore in his sleep. Now he was suddenly taken with violent shivering,so that his teeth chattered and all his limbs were shaking. Heopened the door and began listening; everything in the house wasasleep. With amazement he gazed at himself and everything in theroom around him, wondering how he could have come in the nightbefore without fastening the door, and have flung himself on thesofa without undressing, without even taking his hat off. It hadfallen off and was lying on the floor near his pillow.

　　"If any one had come in, what would he have thought? That I'mdrunk but..."

　　He rushed to the window. There was light enough, and he beganhurriedly looking himself all over from head to foot, all his clothes;were there no traces? But there was no doing it like that; shiveringwith cold, he began taking off everything and looking over again. Heturned everything over to the last threads and rags, and mistrustinghimself, went through his search three times.

　　But there seemed to be nothing, no trace, except in one place, wheresome thick drops of congealed blood were clinging to the frayed edgeof his trousers. He picked up a big claspknife and cut off thefrayed threads. There seemed to be nothing more.

　　Suddenly he remembered that the purse and the things he had takenout of the old woman's box were still in his pockets! He had notthought till then of taking them out and hiding them! He had noteven thought of them while he was examining his clothes! What next?Instantly he rushed to take them out, and fling them on the table.When he had pulled out everything, and turned the pocket inside out tobe sure there was nothing left, he carried the whole heap to thecorner. The paper had come off the bottom of the wall and hung therein tatters. He began stuffing all the things into the hole under thepaper: "They're in! All out of sight, and the purse too!" he thoughtgleefully, getting up and gazing blankly at the hole which bulgedout more than ever. Suddenly he shuddered all over with horror; "MyGod!" he whispered in despair: "what's the matter with me? Is thathidden? Is that the way to hide things?"

　　He had not reckoned on having trinkets to hide. He had onlythought of money, and so had not prepared a hiding-place.

　　"But now, now, what am I glad of?" he thought, "Is that hidingthings? My reason's deserting me- simply!"

　　He sat down on the sofa in exhaustion and was at once shaken byanother unbearable fit of shivering. Mechanically he drew from a chairbeside him his old student's winter coat, which was still warmthough almost in rags, covered himself up with it and once more sankinto drowsiness and delirium. He lost consciousness.

　　Not more than five minutes had passed when he jumped up a secondtime, and at once pounced in a frenzy on his clothes again.

　　"How could I go to sleep again with nothing done? Yes, yes; I havenot taken the loop off the armhole! I forgot it, forgot a thing likethat! Such a piece of evidence!"

　　He pulled off the noose, hurriedly cut it to pieces and threw thebits among his linen under the pillow.

　　"Pieces of torn linen couldn't rouse suspicion, whatever happened; Ithink not, I think not, any way!" he repeated, standing in themiddle of the room, and with painful concentration he fell to gazingabout him again, at the floor and everywhere, trying to make sure hehad not forgotten anything. The conviction, that all his faculties,even memory, and the simplest power of reflection were failing him,began to be an insufferable torture.

　　"Surely it isn't beginning already! Surely it isn't my punishmentcoming upon me? It is!"

　　The frayed rags he had cut off his trousers were actually lying onthe floor in the middle of the room, where any one coming in would seethem!

　　"What is the matter with me!" he cried again, like one distraught.

　　Then a strange idea entered his head; that, perhaps, all his clotheswere covered with blood, that, perhaps, there were a great manystains, but that he did not see them, did not notice them becausehis perceptions were failing, were going to pieces... his reason wasclouded.... Suddenly he remembered that there had been blood on thepurse too. "Ah! Then there must be blood on the pocket too, for Iput the wet purse in my pocket!"

　　In a flash he had turned the pocket inside out and, yes!- there weretraces, stains on the lining of the pocket!

　　"So my reason has not quite deserted me, so I still have somesense and memory, since I guessed it of myself," he thoughttriumphantly, with a deep sigh of relief: "It's simply the weakness offever, a moment's delirium," and he tore the whole lining out of theleft pocket of his trousers. At that instant the sunlight fell onhis left boot; on the sock which poked out from the boot, he fanciedthere were traces! He flung off his boots: "traces indeed! The tipof the sock was soaked with blood"; he must have unwarily stepped intothat pool.... "But what am I to do with this now? Where am I to putthe sock and rags and pocket?"

　　He gathered them all up in his hands and stood in the middle ofthe room.

　　"In the stove? But they would ransack the stove first of all. Burnthem? But what can I burn them with? There are no matches even. No,better go out and throw it all away somewhere. Yes, better throw itaway," he repeated, sitting down on the sofa again, "and at once, thisminute, without lingering..."

　　But his head sank on the pillow instead. Again the unbearable icyshivering came over him; again he drew his coat over him.

　　And for a long while, for some hours, he was haunted by theimpulse to "go off somewhere at once, this moment, and fling it allaway, so that it may be out of sight and done with, at once, at once!"Several times he tried to rise from the sofa but could not.

　　He was thoroughly waked up at last by a violent knocking at hisdoor.

　　"Open, do, are you dead or alive? He keeps sleeping here!" shoutedNastasya, banging with her fist on the door. "For whole daystogether he's snoring here like a dog! A dog he is too. Open I tellyou. It's past ten."

　　"Maybe he's not at home," said a man's voice.

　　"Ha! that's the porter's voice.... What does he want?"

　　He jumped up and sat on the sofa. The beating of his heart was apositive pain.

　　"Then who can have latched the door?" retorted Nastasya.

　　"He's taken to bolting himself in! As if he were worth stealing!Open, you stupid, wake up!"

　　"What do they want? Why the porter? All's discovered. Resist oropen? Come what may!..."

　　He half rose, stooped forward and unlatched the door.

　　His room was so small that he could undo the latch without leavingthe bed. Yes; the porter and Nastasya were standing there.

　　Nastasya stared at him in a strange way. He glanced with a defiantand desperate air at the porter, who without a word held out a greyfolded paper sealed with bottle-wax.

　　"A notice from the office," he announced, as he gave him the paper.

　　"From what office?"

　　"A summons to the police office, of course. You know which office."

　　"To the police?... What for?..."

　　"How can I tell? You're sent for, so you go."

　　The man looked at him attentively, looked round the room andturned to go away.

　　"He's downright ill!" observed Nastasya, not taking her eyes offhim. The porter turned his head for a moment. "He's been in a feversince yesterday," she added.

　　Raskolnikov made no response and held the paper in his hands,without opening it. "Don't you get up then," Nastasya went oncompassionately, seeing that he was letting his feet down from thesofa. "You're ill, and so don't go; there's no such hurry. What haveyou got there?"

　　He looked; in his right hand he held the shreds he had cut fromhis trousers, the sock, and the rags of the pocket. So he had beenasleep with them in his hand. Afterwards reflecting upon it, heremembered that half waking up in his fever, he had grasped all thistightly in his hand and so fallen asleep again.

　　"Look at the rags he's collected and sleeps with them, as thoughhe has got hold of a treasure..."

　　And Nastasya went off into her hysterical giggle.

　　Instantly he thrust them all under his great coat and fixed his eyesintently upon her. Far as he was from being capable of rationalreflection at that moment, he felt that no one would behave likethat with a person who was going to be arrested. "But... the police?"

　　"You'd better have some tea! Yes? I'll bring it, there's some left."

　　"No... I'm going; I'll go at once," he muttered, getting on to hisfeet.

　　"Why, you'll never get downstairs!"

　　"Yes, I'll go."

　　"As you please."

　　She followed the porter out.

　　At once he rushed to the light to examine the sock and the rags.

　　"There are stains, but not very noticeable; all covered with dirt,and rubbed and already discoloured. No one who had no suspicioncould distinguish anything. Nastasya from a distance could not havenoticed, thank God!" Then with a tremor he broke the seal of thenotice and began reading; he was a long while reading, before heunderstood. It was an ordinary summons from the district policestation to appear that day at half past nine at the office of thedistrict superintendent.

　　"But when has such a thing happened? I never have anything to dowith the police! And why just to-day?" he thought in agonisingbewilderment. "Good God, only get it over soon!"

　　He was flinging himself on his knees to pray, but broke intolaughter- not at the idea of prayer, but at himself.

　　He began, hurriedly dressing. "If I'm lost, I am lost, I don't care!Shall I put the sock on?" he suddenly wondered, "it will get dustierstill and the traces will be gone."

　　But no sooner had he put it on than he pulled it off again inloathing and horror. He pulled it off, but reflecting that he had noother socks, he picked it up and put it on again- and again helaughed.

　　"That's all conventional, that's all relative, merely a way oflooking at it," he thought in a flash, but only on the top surfaceof his mind, while he was shuddering all over, "there, I've got it on!I have finished by getting it on!"

　　But his laughter was quickly followed by despair.

　　"No, it's too much for me..." he thought. His legs shook. "Fromfear," he muttered. His head swam and ached with fever. "It's a trick!They want to decoy me there and confound me over everything," hemused, as he went out on to the stairs- "the worst of it is I'm almostlight-headed... I may blurt out something stupid..."

　　On the stairs he remembered that he was leaving all the thingsjust as they were in the hole in the wall, "and very likely, it's onpurpose to search when I'm out," he thought, and stopped short. But hewas possessed by such despair, such cynicism of misery, if one mayso call it, that with a wave of his hand he went on. "Only to get itover!"

　　In the street the heat was insufferable again; not a drop of rainhad fallen all those days. Again dust, bricks, and mortar, again thestench from the shops and pot-houses, again the drunken men, theFinnish pedlars and half-broken-down cabs. The sun shone straight inhis eyes, so that it hurt him to look out of them, and he felt hishead going round- as a man in a fever is apt to feel when he comes outinto the street on a bright sunny day.

　　When he reached the turning into the street, in an agony oftrepidation he looked down it... at the house... and at once avertedhis eyes.

　　"If they question me, perhaps I'll simply tell," he thought, as hedrew near the police station.

　　The police station was about a quarter of a mile off. It hadlately been moved to new rooms on the fourth floor of a new house.He had been once for a moment in the old office but long ago.Turning in at the gateway, he saw on the right a flight of stairswhich a peasant was mounting with a book in his hand. "A house-porter,no doubt; so then, the office is here," and he began ascending thestairs on the chance. He did not want to ask questions of any one.

　　"I'll go in, fall on my knees, and confess everything..." hethought, as he reached the fourth floor.

　　The staircase was steep, narrow and all sloppy with dirty water. Thekitchens of the flats opened on to the stairs and stood open almostthe whole day. So there was a fearful smell and heat. The staircasewas crowded with porters going up and down with their books undertheir arms, policemen, and persons of all sorts and both sexes. Thedoor of the office, too, stood wide open. Peasants stood waitingwithin. There, too, the heat was stifling and there was a sickeningsmell of fresh paint and stale oil from the newly decorated rooms.

　　After waiting a little, he decided to move forward into the nextroom. All the rooms were small and low-pitched. A fearful impatiencedrew him on and on. No one paid attention to him. In the second roomsome clerks sat writing, dressed hardly better than he was, and rathera queer-looking set. He went up to one of them.

　　"What is it?"

　　He showed the notice he had received.

　　"You are a student?" the man asked, glancing at the notice.

　　"Yes, formerly a student."

　　The clerk looked at him, but without the slightest interest. Hewas a particularly unkempt person with the look of a fixed idea in hiseye.

　　"There would be no getting anything out of him, because he has nointerest in anything," thought Raskolnikov.

　　"Go in there to the head clerk," said the clerk, pointing towardsthe furthest room.

　　He went into that room- the fourth in order; it was a small room andpacked full of people, rather better dressed than in the outerrooms. Among them were two ladies. One, poorly dressed in mourning,sat at the table opposite the chief clerk, writing something at hisdictation. The other, a very stout, buxom woman with a purplish-red,blotchy face, excessively smartly dressed with a brooch on her bosomas big as a saucer, was standing on one side, apparently waiting forsomething. Raskolnikov thrust his notice upon the head clerk. Thelatter glanced at it, said: "Wait a minute," and went on attendingto the lady in mourning.

　　He breathed more freely. "It can't be that!"

　　By degrees he began to regain confidence, he kept urging himselfto have courage and be calm.

　　"Some foolishness, some trifling carelessness, and I may betraymyself! Hm... it's a pity there's no air here," he added, "it'sstifling.... It makes one's head dizzier than ever... and one's mindtoo..."

　　He was conscious of a terrible inner turmoil. He was afraid oflosing his self-control; he tried to catch at something and fix hismind on it, something quite irrelevant, but he could not succeed inthis at all. Yet the head clerk greatly interested him, he kept hopingto see through him and guess something from his face.

　　He was a very young man, about two and twenty, with a dark mobileface that looked older than his years. He was fashionably dressedand foppish, with his hair parted in the middle, well combed andpomaded, and wore a number of rings on his well-scrubbed fingers and agold chain on his waistcoat. He said a couple of words in French toa foreigner who was in the room, and said them fairly correctly.

　　"Luise Ivanovna, you can sit down," he said casually to thegaily-dressed, purple-faced lady, who was still standing as though notventuring to sit down, though there was a chair beside her.

　　"Ich danke," said the latter, and softly, with a rustle of silkshe sank into the chair. Her light blue dress trimmed with whitelace floated about the table like an air-balloon and filled almosthalf the room. She smelt of scent. But she was obviously embarrassedat filling half the room and smelling so strongly of scent; and thoughher smile was impudent as well as cringing, it betrayed evidentuneasiness.

　　The lady in mourning had done at last, and got up. All at once, withsome noise, an officer walked in very jauntily, with a peculiarswing of his shoulders at each step. He tossed his cockaded cap on thetable and sat down in an easy-chair. The small lady positively skippedfrom her seat on seeing him, and fell to curtsying in a sort ofecstasy; but the officer took not the smallest notice of her, andshe did not venture to sit down again in his presence. He was theassistant superintendent. He had a reddish moustache that stood outhorizontally on each side of his face, and extremely small features,expressive of nothing much except a certain insolence. He lookedaskance and rather indignantly at Raskolnikov; he was so very badlydressed, and in spite of his humiliating position, his bearing wasby no means in keeping with his clothes. Raskolnikov had unwarilyfixed a very long and direct look on him, so that he felt positivelyaffronted.

　　"What do you want?" he shouted, apparently astonished that such aragged fellow was not annihilated by the majesty of his glance.

　　"I was summoned... by a notice..." Raskolnikov faltered.

　　"For the recovery of money due, from the student," the head clerkinterfered hurriedly, tearing himself from his papers. "Here!" andhe flung Raskolnikov a document and pointed out the place. "Readthat!"

　　"Money? What money?" thought Raskolnikov, "but... then... it'scertainly not that."

　　And he trembled with joy. He felt sudden intense indescribablerelief. A load was lifted from his back.

　　"And pray, what time were you directed to appear, sir?" shoutedthe assistant superintendent, seeming for some unknown reason more andmore aggrieved. "You are told to come at nine, and now it's twelve!"

　　"The notice was only brought me a quarter of an hour ago,"Raskolnikov answered loudly over his shoulder. To his own surprise he,too, grew suddenly angry and found a certain pleasure in it. "And it'senough that I have come here ill with fever."

　　"Kindly refrain from shouting!"

　　"I'm not shouting, I'm speaking very quietly, it's you who areshouting at me. I'm a student, and allow no one to shout at me."

　　The assistant superintendent was so furious that for the firstminute he could only splutter inarticulately. He leaped up from hisseat.

　　"Be silent! You are in a government office. Don't be impudent, sir!"

　　"You're in a government office, too," cried Raskolnikov, "and you'resmoking a cigarette as well as shouting, so you are showing disrespectto all of us."

　　He felt an indescribable satisfaction at having said this.

　　The head clerk looked at him with a smile. The angry assistantsuperintendent was obviously disconcerted.

　　"That's not your business!" he shouted at last with unnaturalloudness. "Kindly make the declaration demanded of you. Show him.Alexandr Grigorievitch. There is a complaint against you! You don'tpay your debts! You're a fine bird!"

　　But Raskolnikov was not listening now; he had eagerly clutched atthe paper, in haste to find an explanation. He read it once, and asecond time, and still did not understand.

　　"What is this?" he asked the head clerk.

　　"It is for the recovery of money on an I.O.U., a writ. You musteither pay it, with all expenses, costs and so on, or give a writtendeclaration when you can pay it, and at the same time an undertakingnot to leave the capital without payment, and nor to sell or concealyour property. The creditor is at liberty to sell your property, andproceed against you according to the law."

　　"But I... am not in debt to any one!"

　　"That's not our business. Here, an I.O.U. for a hundred andfifteen roubles, legally attested, and due for payment, has beenbrought us for recovery, given by you to the widow of the assessorZarnitsyn, nine months ago, and paid over by the widow Zarnitsyn toone Mr. Tchebarov. We therefore summon you hereupon."

　　"But she is my landlady!"

　　"And what if she is your landlady?"

　　The head clerk looked at him with a condescending smile ofcompassion, and at the same time with a certain triumph, as at anovice under fire for the first time- as though he would say: "Well,how do you feel now?" But what did he care now for an I.O.U., for awrit of recovery! Was that worth worrying about now, was it worthattention even! He stood, he read, he listened, he answered, he evenasked questions himself, but all mechanically. The triumphant sense ofsecurity, of deliverance from overwhelming danger, that was whatfilled his whole soul that moment without thought for the future,without analysis, without suppositions or surmises, without doubts andwithout questioning. It was an instant of full, direct, purelyinstinctive joy. But at that very moment something like a thunderstormtook place in the office. The assistant superintendent, still shakenby Raskolnikov's disrespect, still fuming and obviously anxious tokeep up his wounded dignity, pounced on the unfortunate smart lady,who had been gazing at him ever since he came in with an exceedinglysilly smile.

　　"You shameful hussy!" he shouted suddenly at the top of his voice.(The lady in mourning had left the office.) "What was going on at yourhouse last night? Eh! A disgrace again, you're a scandal to thewhole street. Fighting and drinking again. Do you want the house ofcorrection? Why, I have warned you ten times over that I would not letyou off the eleventh! And here you are again, again, you... you...!"

　　The paper fell out of Raskolnikov's hands, and he looked wildly atthe smart lady who was so unceremoniously treated. But he soon sawwhat it meant, and at once began to find positive amusement in thescandal. He listened with pleasure, so that he longed to laugh andlaugh... all his nerves were on edge.

　　"Ilya Petrovitch!" the head clerk was beginning anxiously, butstopped short, for he knew from experience that the enragedassistant could not be stopped except by force.

　　As for the smart lady, at first she positively trembled before thestorm. But strange to say, the more numerous and violent the termsof abuse became, the more amiable she looked, and the more seductivethe smiles she lavished on the terrible assistant. She moved uneasily,and curtsied incessantly, waiting impatiently for a chance ofputting in her word; and at last she found it.

　　"There was no sort of noise or fighting in my house, Mr. Captain,"she pattered all at once, like peas dropping, speaking Russianconfidently, though with a strong German accent, "and no sort ofscandal, and his honour came drunk, and it's the whole truth I amtelling, Mr. Captain, and I am not to blame.... Mine is anhonourable house, Mr. Captain, and honourable behaviour, Mr.Captain, and I always, always dislike any scandal myself. But hecame quite tipsy, and asked for three bottles again, and then helifted up one leg, and began playing the pianoforte with one foot, andthat is not at all right in an honourable house, and he ganz broke thepiano, and it was very bad manners indeed and I said so. And he tookup a bottle and began hitting every one with it. And then I called theporter, and Karl came, and he took Karl and hit him in the eye; and hehit Henriette in the eye, too, and gave me five slaps on the cheek.And it was so ungentlemanly in an honourable house, Mr. Captain, and Iscreamed. And he opened the window over the canal, and stood in thewindow, squealing like a little pig; it was a disgrace. The idea ofsquealing like a little pig at the window into the street! Fie uponhim! And Karl pulled him away from the window by his coat, and it istrue, Mr. Captain, he tore sein Rock. And then he shouted that manmuss pay him fifteen roubles damages. And I did pay him, Mr.Captain, five roubles for sein Rock. And he is an ungentlemanlyvisitor and caused all the scandal. 'I will show you up,' he said,'for I can write to all the papers about you.'"

　　"Then he was an author?"

　　"Yes, Mr. Captain, and what an ungentlemanly visitor in anhonourable house...."

　　"Now then! Enough! I have told you already..."

　　"Ilya Petrovitch!" the head clerk repeated significantly.

　　The assistant glanced rapidly at him; the head clerk slightlyshook his head.

　　"... So I tell you this, most respectable Luise Ivanovna, and I tellit you for the last time," the assistant went on. "If there is ascandal in your honourable house once again, I will put you yourselfin the lock-up, as it is called in polite society. Do you hear? So aliterary man, an author took five roubles for his coat-tail in an'honourable house'? A nice set, these authors!"

　　And he cast a contemptuous glance at Raskolnikov. "There was ascandal the other day in a restaurant, too. An author had eaten hisdinner and would not pay; 'I'll write a satire on you,' says he. Andthere was another of them on a steamer last week used the mostdisgraceful language to the respectable family of a civilcouncillor, his wife and daughter. And there was one of them turnedout of a confectioner's shop the other day. They are like that,authors, literary men, students, town-criers... Pfoo! You get along! Ishall look in upon you myself one day. Then you had better be careful!Do you hear?"

　　With hurried deference, Luise Ivanovna fell to curtsying in alldirections, and so curtsied herself to the door. But at the door,she stumbled backwards against a good-looking officer with a fresh,open face and splendid thick fair whiskers. This was thesuperintendent of the district himself, Nikodim Fomitch. LuiseIvanovna made haste to curtsy almost to the ground, and with mincinglittle steps, she fluttered out of the office.

　　"Again thunder and lightning- a hurricane!" said Nikodim Fomitchto Ilya Petrovitch in a civil and friendly tone. "You are arousedagain, you are fuming again! I heard it on the stairs!"

　　"Well, what then!" Ilya Petrovitch drawled with gentlemanlynonchalance; and he walked with some papers to another table, with ajaunty swing of his shoulders at each step. "Here, if you willkindly look: an author, or a student, has been one at least, doesnot pay his debts, has given an I.O.U., won't clear out of his room,and complaints are constantly being lodged against him, and here hehas been pleased to make a protest against my smoking in his presence!He behaves like a cad himself, and just look at him, please. Here'sthe gentleman, and very attractive he is!"

　　"Poverty is not a vice, my friend, but we know you go off likepowder, you can't bear a slight, I daresay you took offence atsomething and went too far yourself," continued Nikodim Fomitch,turning affably to Raskolnikov. "But you were wrong there; he is acapital fellow, I assure you, but explosive, explosive! He gets hot,fires up, boils over, and no stopping him! And then it's all over! Andat the bottom he's a heart of gold! His nickname in the regiment wasthe Explosive Lieutenant...."

　　"And what a regiment it was, too," cried Ilya Petrovitch, muchgratified at this agreeable banter, though still sulky.

　　Raskolnikov had a sudden desire to say something exceptionallypleasant to them all. "Excuse me, Captain," he began easily,suddenly addressing Nikodim Fomitch, "will you enter into myposition.... I am ready to ask pardon, if I have been ill-mannered.I am a poor student, sick and shattered (shattered was the word heused) by poverty. I am not studying, because I cannot keep myself now,but I shall get money.... I have a mother and sister in the provinceof X. They will send it to me, and I will pay. My landlady is agood-hearted woman, but she is so exasperated at my having lost mylessons, and not paying her for the last four months, that she doesnot even send up my dinner... and I don't understand this I.O.U. atall. She is asking me to pay her on this I.O.U. How am I to pay her?Judge for yourselves!..."

　　"But that is not our business, you know," the head clerk wasobserving.

　　"Yes, yes. I perfectly agree with you. But allow me to explain..."Raskolnikov put in again, still addressing Nikodim Fomitch, but tryinghis best to address Ilya Petrovitch also, though the latterpersistently appeared to be rummaging among his papers and to becontemptuously oblivious of him. "Allow me to explain that I have beenliving with her for nearly three years and at first... at first... forwhy should I not confess it, at the very beginning I promised to marryher daughter, it was a verbal promise, freely given... she was agirl... indeed, I liked her, though I was not in love with her... ayouthful affair in fact... that is, I mean to say, that my landladygave me credit freely in those days, and I led a life of... I was veryheedless..."

　　"Nobody asks you for these personal details, sir, we've no time towaste," Ilya Petrovitch interposed roughly and with a note of triumph;but Raskolnikov stopped him hotly, though he suddenly found itexceedingly difficult to speak.

　　"But excuse me, excuse me. It is for me to explain... how it allhappened... In my turn... though I agree with you... it isunnecessary. But a year ago, the girl died of typhus. I remainedlodging there as before, and when my landlady moved into her presentquarters, she said to me... and in a friendly way... that she hadcomplete trust in me, but still, would I not give her an I.O.U. forone hundred and fifteen roubles, all the debt I owed her. She saidif only I gave her that, she would trust me again, as much as I liked,and that she would never, never- those were her own words- make use ofthat I.O.U. till I could pay of myself... and now, when I have lost mylessons and have nothing to eat, she takes action against me. Whatam I to say to that?"

　　"All these affecting details are no business of ours." IlyaPetrovitch interrupted rudely. "You must give a written undertakingbut as for your love affairs and all these tragic events, we havenothing to do with that."

　　"Come now... you are harsh," muttered Nikodim Fomitch, sittingdown at the table and also beginning to write. He looked a littleashamed.

　　"Write!" said the head clerk to Raskolnikov.

　　"Write what?" the latter asked, gruffly.

　　"I will dictate to you."

　　Raskolnikov fancied that the head clerk treated him more casuallyand contemptuously after his speech, but strange to say he suddenlyfelt completely indifferent to any one's opinion, and this revulsiontook place in a flash, in one instant. If he had cared to think alittle, he would have been amazed indeed that he could have talkedto them like that a minute before, forcing his feelings upon them. Andwhere had those feelings come from? Now if the whole room had beenfilled, not with police officers, but with those nearest and dearestto him, he would not have found one human word for them, so emptywas his heart. A gloomy sensation of agonising, everlasting solitudeand remoteness, took conscious form in his soul. It was not themeanness of his sentimental effusions before Ilya Petrovitch, northe meanness of the latter's triumph over him that had caused thissudden revulsion in his heart. Oh, what had he to do now with hisown baseness, with all these petty vanities, officers, German women,debts, police offices? If he had been sentenced to be burnt at thatmoment, he would not have stirred, would hardly have heard thesentence to the end. Something was happening to him entirely new,sudden and unknown. It was not that he understood, but he felt clearlywith all the intensity of sensation that he could never more appeal tothese people in the police office with sentimental effusion like hisrecent outburst, or with anything whatever; and that if they hadbeen his own brothers and sisters and not police officers, it wouldhave been utterly out of the question to appeal to them in anycircumstance of life. He had never experienced such a strange andawful sensation. And what was most agonising- it was more asensation than a conception or idea, a direct sensation, the mostagonising of all the sensations he had known in his life.

　　The head clerk began dictating to him the usual form of declaration,that he could not pay, that he undertook to do so at a future date,that he would not leave the town, nor sell his property, and so on.

　　"But you can't write, you can hardly hold the pen," observed thehead clerk, looking with curiosity at Raskolnikov. "Are you ill?"

　　"Yes, I am giddy. Go on!"

　　"That's all. Sign it."

　　The head clerk took the paper, and turned to attend to others.

　　Raskolnikov gave back the pen; but instead of getting up and goingaway, he put his elbows on the table and pressed his head in hishands. He felt as if a nail were being driven into his skull. Astrange idea suddenly occurred to him, to get up at once, to go upto Nikodim Fomitch, and tell him everything that had happenedyesterday, and then to go with him to his lodgings and to show him thethings in the hole in the corner. The impulse was so strong that hegot up from his seat to carry it out. "Hadn't I better think aminute?" flashed through his mind. "No, better cast off the burdenwithout thinking." But all at once he stood still, rooted to the spot.Nikodim Fomitch was talking eagerly with Ilya Petrovitch, and thewords reached him:

　　"It's impossible, they'll both be released. To begin with, the wholestory contradicts itself. Why should they have called the porter, ifit had been their doing? To inform against themselves? Or as ablind? No, that would be too cunning! Besides, Pestryakov, thestudent, was seen at the gate by both the porters and a woman as hewent in. He was walking with three friends, who left him only at thegate, and he asked the porters to direct him, in the presence of thefriends. Now, would he have asked his way if he had been going withsuch an object? As for Koch, he spent half an hour at thesilversmith's below, before he went up to the old woman and he lefthim at exactly a quarter to eight. Now just consider..."

　　"But excuse me, how do you explain this contradiction? They statethemselves that they knocked and the door was locked; yet threeminutes later when they went up with the porter, it turned out thedoor was unfastened."

　　"That's just it; the murderer must have been there and boltedhimself in; and they'd have caught him for a certainty if Koch had notbeen an ass and gone to look for the porter too. He must have seizedthe interval to get downstairs and slip by them somehow. Koch keepscrossing himself and saying: "If I had been there, he would havejumped out and killed me with his axe.' He is going to have athanksgiving service- ha, ha!"

　　"And no one saw the murderer?"

　　"They might well not see him; the house is a regular Noah's Ark,"said the head clerk, who was listening.

　　"It's clear, quite clear," Nikodim Fomitch repeated warmly.

　　"No, it is anything but clear," Ilya Petrovitch maintained.

　　Raskolnikov picked up his hat and walked towards the door, but hedid not reach it....

　　When he recovered consciousness, he found himself sitting in achair, supported by some one on the right side, while some one elsewas standing on the left, holding a yellowish glass filled with yellowwater, and Nikodim Fomitch standing before him, looking intently athim. He got up from the chair.

　　"What's this? Are you ill?" Nikodim Fomitch asked, rather sharply.

　　"He could hardly hold his pen when he was signing," said the headclerk, settling back in his place, and taking up his work again.

　　"Have you been ill long?" cried Ilya Petrovitch from his place,where he, too, was looking through papers. He had, of course, cometo look at the sick man when he fainted, but retired at once when herecovered.

　　"Since yesterday," muttered Raskolnikov in reply.

　　"Did you go out yesterday?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Though you were ill?"

　　"Yes."

　　"At what time?"

　　"About seven."

　　"And where did you go, my I ask?"

　　"Along the street."

　　"Short and clear."

　　Raskolnikov, white as a handkerchief, had answered sharply, jerkily,without dropping his black feverish eyes before Ilya Petrovitch'sstare.

　　"He can scarcely stand upright. And you..." Nikodim Fomitch wasbeginning.

　　"No matter," Ilya Petrovitch pronounced rather peculiarly.

　　Nikodim Fomitch would have made some further protest, but glancingat the head clerk who was looking very hard at him, he did notspeak. There was a sudden silence. It was strange.

　　"Very well, then," concluded Ilya Petrovitch, "we will not detainyou."

　　Raskolnikov went out. He caught the sound of eager conversation onhis departure, and above the rest rose the questioning voice ofNikodim Fomitch. In the street, his faintness passed off completely.

　　"A search- there will be a search at once," he repeated tohimself, hurrying home. "The brutes! they suspect."

　　His former terror mastered him completely again.

　　Chapter Two

　　"AND WHAT if there has been a search already? What if I find them inmy room?"

　　But here was his room. Nothing and no one in it. No one had peepedin. Even Nastasya had not touched it. But heavens! how could he haveleft all those things in the hole?

　　He rushed to the corner, slipped his hand under the paper, pulledthe things out and lined his pockets with them. There were eightarticles in all: two little boxes with ear-rings or something of thesort, he hardly looked to see; then four small leather cases. Therewas a chain, too, merely wrapped in newspaper and something else innewspaper, that looked like a decoration.... He put them all in thedifferent pockets of his overcoat, and the remaining pocket of histrousers, trying to conceal them as much as possible. He took thepurse, too. Then he went out of his room, leaving the door open. Hewalked quickly and resolutely, and though he felt shattered, he hadhis senses about him. He was afraid of pursuit, he was afraid thatin another half-hour, another quarter of an hour perhaps, instructionswould be issued for his pursuit, and so at all costs, he must hide alltraces before then. He must clear everything up while he still hadsome strength, some reasoning power left him.... Where was he to go?

　　That had long been settled: "Fling them into the canal, and alltraces hidden in the water, the thing would be at an end." So he haddecided in the night of his delirium when several times he had had theimpulse to get up and go away, to make haste, and get rid of it all.But to get rid of it, turned out to be a very difficult task. Hewandered along the bank of the Ekaterininsky Canal for half an hour ormore and looked several times at the steps running down to thewater, but he could not think of carrying out his plan; either raftsstood at the steps' edge, and women were washing clothes on them, orboats were moored there, and people were swarming everywhere. Moreoverhe could be seen and noticed from the banks on all sides; it wouldlook suspicious for a man to go down on purpose, stop, and throwsomething into the water. And what if the boxes were to floatinstead of sinking? And of course they would. Even as it was, everyone he met seemed to stare and look round, as if they had nothing todo but to watch him. "Why is it, or can it be my fancy?" he thought.

　　At last the thought struck him that it might be better to go tothe Neva. There were not so many people there, he would be lessobserved, and it would be more convenient in every way, above all itwas further off. He wondered how he could have been wandering for agood half-hour, worried and anxious in this dangerous part withoutthinking of it before. And that half-hour he had lost over anirrational plan, simply because he had thought of it in delirium! Hehad become extremely absent and forgetful and he was aware of it. Hecertainly must make haste.

　　He walked towards the Neva along V___ Prospect, but on the wayanother idea struck him. "Why to the Neva? Would it not be better togo somewhere far off, to the Islands again, and there hide thethings in some solitary place, in a wood or under a bush, and mark thespot perhaps?" And though he felt incapable of clear judgment, theidea seemed to him a sound one. But he was not destined to go there.For coming out of V___ Prospect towards the square, he saw on the lefta passage leading between two blank walls to a courtyard. On the righthand, the blank unwhitewashed wall of a four-storied house stretchedfar into the court; on the left, a wooden hoarding ran parallel withit for twenty paces into the court, and then turned sharply to theleft. Here was a deserted fenced-off place where rubbish ofdifferent sorts was lying. At the end of the court, the corner of alow, smutty, stone shed, apparently part of some workshop, peeped frombehind the hoarding. It was probably a carriage builder's orcarpenter's shed; the whole place from the entrance was black withcoal dust. Here would be the place to throw it, he thought. Not seeingany one in the yard, he slipped in, and at once saw near the gate asink, such as is often put in yards where there are many workmen orcabdrivers; and on the hoarding above had been scribbled in chalkthe time-honoured witticism, "Standing here strictly forbidden."This was all the better, for there would be nothing suspicious abouthis going in. "Here I could throw it all in a heap and get away!"

　　Looking round once more, with his hand already in his pocket, henoticed against the outer wall, between the entrance and the sink, abig unhewn stone, weighing perhaps sixty pounds. The other side of thewall was a street. He could hear passers-by, always numerous in thatpart, but he could not be seen from the entrance, unless some one camein from the street, which might well happen indeed, so there wasneed of haste.

　　He bent down over the stone, seized the top of it firmly in bothhands, and using all his strength turned it over. Under the stonewas a small hollow in the ground, and he immediately emptied hispocket into it. The purse lay at the top, and yet the hollow was notfilled up. Then he seized the stone again and with one twist turned itback, so that it was in the same position again, though it stood avery little higher. But he scraped the earth about it and pressed itat the edges with his foot. Nothing could be noticed.

　　Then he went out, and turned into the square. Again an intense,almost unbearable joy overwhelmed him for an instant, as it had in thepolice office. "I have buried my tracks! And who, who can think oflooking under that stone? It has been lying there most likely eversince the house was built, and will lie as many years more. And ifit were found, who would think of me? It is all over! No clue!" And helaughed. Yes, he remembered that he began laughing a thin, nervousnoiseless laugh, and went on laughing all the time he was crossing thesquare. But when he reached the K___ Boulevard where two days beforehe had come upon that girl, his laughter suddenly ceased. Otherideas crept into his mind. He felt all at once that it would beloathsome to pass that seat on which after the girl was gone, he hadsat and pondered, and that it would be hateful, too, to meet thatwhiskered policeman to whom he had given the twenty copecks: "Damnhim!"

　　He walked, looking about him angrily and distractedly. All his ideasnow seemed to be circling round some single point, and he felt thatthere really was such a point, and that now, now, he was left facingthat point- and for the first time, indeed, during the last twomonths.

　　"Damn it all!" he thought suddenly, in a fit of ungovernable fury."If it has begun, then it has begun. Hang the new life! Good Lord, howstupid it is!... And what lies I told to-day! How despicably Ifawned upon that wretched Ilya Petrovitch! But that is all folly! Whatdo I care for them all, and my fawning upon them! It is not that atall! It is not that at all!"

　　Suddenly he stopped; a new utterly unexpected and exceedingly simplequestion perplexed and bitterly confounded him.

　　"If it all has really been done deliberately and not idiotically, ifI really had a certain and definite object, how is it I did not evenglance into the purse and don't know what I had there, for which Ihave undergone these agonies, and have deliberately undertaken thisbase, filthy degrading business? And here I wanted at once to throwinto the water the purse together with all the things which I hadnot seen either... how's that?"

　　Yes, that was so, that was all so. Yet he had known it all before,and it was not a new question for him, even when it was decided in thenight without hesitation and consideration, as though so it must be,as though it could not possibly be otherwise.... Yes, he had knownit all, and understood it all; it surely had all been settled evenyesterday at the moment when he was bending over the box and pullingthe jewel-cases out of it.... Yes, so it was.

　　"It is because I am very ill," he decided grimly at last, "I havebeen worrying and fretting myself, and I don't know what I amdoing.... Yesterday and the day before yesterday and all this time Ihave been worrying myself.... I shall get well and I shall notworry.... But what if I don't get well at all? Good God, how sick I amof it all!"

　　He walked on without resting. He had a terrible longing for somedistraction, but he did not know what to do, what to attempt. A newoverwhelming sensation was gaining more and more mastery over himevery moment; this was an immeasurable, almost physical, repulsion foreverything surrounding him, an obstinate, malignant feeling of hatred.All who met him were loathsome to him- he loathed their faces, theirmovements, their gestures. If any one had addressed him, he feltthat he might have spat at him or bitten him....

　　He stopped suddenly, on coming out on the bank of the Little Neva,near the bridge to Vassilyevsky Ostrov. "Why, he lives here, in thathouse," he thought, "why, I have not come to Razumihin of my ownaccord! Here it's the same thing over again.... Very interesting toknow, though; have I come on purpose or have I simply walked here bychance? Never mind, I said the day before yesterday that I would goand see him the day after; well, and so I will! Besides I reallycannot go further now."

　　He went up to Razumihin's room on the fifth floor.

　　The latter was at home in his garret, busily writing at themoment, and he opened the door himself. It was four months sincethey had seen each other. Razumihin was sitting in a raggeddressing-gown, with slippers on his bare feet, unkempt, unshaven andunwashed. His face showed surprise.

　　"Is it you?" he cried. He looked his comrade up and down; then aftera brief pause, he whistled. "As hard up as all that! Why, brother,you've cut me out!" he added, looking at Raskolnikov's rags. "Come sitdown, you are tired, I'll be bound."

　　And when he had sunk down on the American leather sofa, which was ineven worse condition than his own, Razumihin saw at once that hisvisitor was ill.

　　"Why, you are seriously ill, do you know that?" He began feeling hispulse. Raskolnikov pulled away his hand.

　　"Never mind," he said, "I have come for this; I have nolessons.... I wanted... but I don't want lessons...."

　　"But I say! You are delirious, you know!" Razumihin observed,watching him carefully.

　　"No, I am not."

　　Raskolnikov got up from the sofa. As he had mounted the stairs toRazumihin's, he had not realised that he would be meeting his friendface to face. Now, in a flash, he knew, that what he was least ofall disposed for at that moment was to be face to face with any one inthe wide world. His spleen rose within him. He almost choked with rageat himself as soon as he crossed Razumihin's threshold.

　　"Good-bye," he said abruptly, and walked to the door.

　　"Stop, stop! You queer fish."

　　"I don't want to," said the other, again pulling away his hand.

　　"Then why the devil have you come? Are you mad, or what? Why, thisis... almost insulting! I won't let you go like that."

　　"Well, then, I came to you because I know no one but you who couldhelp... to begin... because you are kinder than any one- clever, Imean, and can judge... and now I see that I want nothing. Do you hear?Nothing at all... no one's services... no one's sympathy. I am bymyself... alone. Come, that's enough. Leave me alone."

　　"Stay a minute, you sweep! You are a perfect madman. As you like forall I care. I have no lessons, do you see, and I don't care aboutthat, but there's a bookseller, Heruvimov- and he takes the place of alesson. I would not exchange him for five lessons. He's doingpublishing of a kind, and issuing natural science manuals and what acirculation they have! The very titles are worth the money! You alwaysmaintained that I was a fool, but by Jove, my boy, there are greaterfools than I am! Now he is setting up for being advanced, not thathe has an inkling of anything, but, of course, I encourage him. Hereare two signatures of the German text- in my opinion, the crudestcharlatanism; it discusses the question, 'Is woman a human being?'And, of course, triumphantly proves that she is. Heruvimov is going tobring out this work as a contribution to the woman question; I amtranslating it; he will expand these two and a half signatures intosix, we shall make up a gorgeous title half a page long and bring itout at half a rouble. It will do! He pays me six roubles thesignature, it works out to fifteen roubles for the job, and I've hadsix already in advance. When we have finished this, we are going tobegin a translation about whales, and then some of the dullestscandals out of the second part of Les Confessions we have markedfor translation; somebody has told Heruvimov, that Rousseau was a kindof Radishchev. You may be sure I don't contradict him, hang him! Well,would you like to do the second signature of 'Is woman a human being?'If you would, take the German and pens and paper- all those areprovided, and take three roubles; for as I have had six roubles inadvance on the whole thing, three roubles come to you for yourshare. And when you have finished the signature there will beanother three roubles for you. And please don't think I am doing you aservice; quite the contrary, as soon as you came in, I saw how youcould help me; to begin with, I am weak in spelling, and secondly, Iam sometimes utterly adrift in German, so that I make it up as I goalong for the most part. The only comfort is, that it's bound to bea change for the better. Though who can tell, maybe it's sometimes forthe worse. Will you take it?"

　　Raskolnikov took the German sheets in silence, took the threeroubles and without a word went out. Razumihin gazed after him inastonishment. But when Raskolnikov was in the next street, he turnedback, mounted the stairs to Razumihin's again and laying on thetable the German article and the three roubles, went out again,still without uttering a word.

　　"Are you raving, or what?" Razumihin shouted, roused to fury atlast. "What farce is this? You'll drive me crazy too... what did youcome to see me for, damn you?"

　　"I don't want... translation," muttered Raskolnikov from the stairs.

　　"Then what the devil do you want?" shouted Razumihin from above.Raskolnikov continued descending the staircase in silence.

　　"Hey, there! Where are you living?"

　　No answer.

　　"Well, confound you then!"

　　But Raskolnikov was already stepping into the street. On theNikolaevsky Bridge he was roused to full consciousness again by anunpleasant incident. A coachman, after shouting at him two or threetimes, gave him a violent lash on the back with his whip, for havingalmost fallen under his horses' hoofs. The lash so infuriated him thathe dashed away to the railing (for some unknown reason he had beenwalking in the very middle of the bridge in the traffic). He angrilyclenched and ground his teeth. He heard laughter, of course.

　　"Serves him right!"

　　"A pickpocket I dare say."

　　"Pretending to be drunk, for sure, and getting under the wheels onpurpose; and you have to answer for him."

　　"It's a regular profession, that's what it is."

　　But while he stood at the railing, still looking angry andbewildered after the retreating carriage, and rubbing his back, hesuddenly felt some one thrust money into his hand. He looked. It wasan elderly woman in a kerchief and goatskin shoes, with a girl,probably her daughter, wearing a hat, and carrying a green parasol.

　　"Take it, my good man, in Christ's name."

　　He took it and they passed on. It was a piece of twenty copecks.From his dress and appearance they might well have taken him for abeggar asking alms in the streets, and the gift of the twentycopecks he doubtless owed to the blow, which made them feel sorryfor him.

　　He closed his hand on the twenty copecks, walked on for ten paces,and turned facing the Neva, looking towards the palace. The sky waswithout a cloud and the water was almost bright blue, which is so rarein the Neva. The cupola of the cathedral, which is seen at its bestfrom the bridge about twenty paces from the chapel, glittered in thesunlight, and in the pure air every ornament on it could be clearlydistinguished. The pain from the lash went off, and Raskolnikov forgotabout it; one uneasy and not quite definite idea occupied him nowcompletely. He stood still, and gazed long and intently into thedistance; this spot was especially familiar to him. When he wasattending the university, he had hundreds of times- generally on hisway home- stood still on this spot, gazed at this truly magnificentspectacle and almost always marvelled at a vague and mysteriousemotion it roused in him. It left him strangely cold; this gorgeouspicture was for him blank and lifeless. He wondered every time athis sombre and enigmatic impression and, mistrusting himself, putoff finding the explanation of it. He vividly recalled those olddoubts and perplexities, and it seemed to him that it was no merechance that he recalled them now. It struck him as strange andgrotesque, that he should have stopped at the same spot as before,as though he actually imagined he could think the same thoughts, beinterested in the same theories and pictures that had interestedhim... so short a time ago. He felt it almost amusing, and yet itwrung his heart. Deep down, hidden far away out of sight all thatseemed to him now- all his old past, his old thoughts, his oldproblems and theories, his old impressions and that picture andhimself and all, all.... He felt as though he were flying upwards, andeverything were vanishing from his sight. Making an unconsciousmovement with his hand, he suddenly became aware of the piece of moneyin his fist. He opened his hand, stared at the coin, and with asweep his arm flung it into the water; then he turned and went home.It seemed to him, he had cut himself off from every one and fromeverything that moment.

　　Evening was coming on when he reached home, so that he must havebeen walking about six hours. How and where he came back he did notremember. Undressing, and quivering like an overdriven horse, he laydown on the sofa, drew his greatcoat over him, and at once sank intooblivion....

　　It was dusk when he was waked up by a fearful scream. Good God, whata scream! Such unnatural sounds, such howling, wailing, grinding,tears, blows and curses he had never heard.

　　He could never have imagined such brutality, such frenzy. Interror he sat up in bed, almost swooning with agony. But the fighting,wailing and cursing grew louder and louder. And then to his intenseamazement he caught the voice of his landlady. She was howling,shrieking and wailing, rapidly, hurriedly, incoherently, so that hecould not make out what she was talking about; she was beseeching,no doubt, not to be beaten, for she was being mercilessly beaten onthe stairs. The voice of her assailant was so horrible from spiteand rage that it was almost a croak; but he, too, was sayingsomething, and just as quickly and indistinctly, hurrying andspluttering. All at once Raskolnikov trembled; he recognized thevoice- it was the voice of Ilya Petrovitch. Ilya Petrovitch here andbeating the landlady! He is kicking her, banging her head againstthe steps- that's clear, that can be told from the sounds, from thecries and the thuds. How is it, is the world topsy-turvy? He couldhear people running in crowds from all the storeys and all thestaircases; he heard voices, exclamations, knocking, doors banging."But why, why, and how could it be?" he repeated, thinking seriouslythat he had gone mad. But no, he heard too distinctly! And theywould come to him then next, "for no doubt... it's all about that...about yesterday.... Good God!" He would have fastened his door withthe latch, but he could not lift his hand... besides, it would beuseless. Terror gripped his heart like ice, tortured him and numbedhim.... But at last all this uproar, after continuing about tenminutes, began gradually to subside. The landlady was moaning andgroaning; Ilya Petrovitch was still uttering threats and curses....But at last he, too, seemed to be silent, and now he could not beheard. "Can he have gone away? Good Lord!" Yes, and now the landladyis going too, still weeping and moaning...  and then her doorslammed.... Now the crowd was going from the stairs to their rooms,exclaiming, disputing, calling to one another, raising their voices toa shout, dropping them to a whisper. There must have been numbers ofthem- almost all the inmates of the block. "But, good God, how couldit be! And why, why had he come here!"

　　Raskolnikov sank worn out on the sofa, but could not close his eyes.He lay for half an hour in such anguish, such an intolerable sensationof infinite terror as he had never experienced before. Suddenly abright light flashed into his room. Nastasya came in with a candle anda plate of soup. Looking at him carefully and ascertaining that he wasnot asleep, she set the candle on the table and began to lay outwhat she had brought- bread, salt, a plate, a spoon.

　　"You've eaten nothing since yesterday, I warrant. You've beentrudging about all day, and you're shaking with fever."

　　"Nastasya... what were they beating the landlady for?"

　　She looked intently at him.

　　"Who beat the landlady?"

　　"Just now... half an hour ago, Ilya Petrovitch, theassistant-superintendent, on the stairs.... Why was he ill-treatingher like that, and... why was he here?"

　　Nastasya scrutinised him, silent and frowning, and her scrutinylasted a long time. He felt uneasy, even frightened at her searchingeyes.

　　"Nastasya, why don't you speak?" he said timidly at last in a weakvoice.

　　"It's the blood," she answered at last softly, as though speaking toherself.

　　"Blood? What blood?" he muttered, growing white and turningtowards the wall.

　　Nastasya still looked at him without speaking.

　　"Nobody has been beating the landlady," she declared at last in afirm, resolute voice.

　　He gazed at her, hardly able to breathe.

　　"I heard it myself.... I was not asleep... I was sitting up," hesaid still more timidly. "I listened a long while. Theassistant-superintendent came.... Every one ran out on to the stairsfrom all the flats."

　　"No one has been here. That's the blood crying in your ears. Whenthere's no outlet for it and it gets clotted, you begin fancyingthings.... Will you eat something?"

　　He made no answer. Nastasya still stood over him, watching him.

　　"Give me something to drink... Nastasya."

　　She went downstairs and returned with a white earthenware jug ofwater. He remembered only swallowing one sip of the cold water andspilling some on his neck. Then followed forgetfulness.

　　Chapter Three

　　HE WAS not completely unconscious, however, all the time he was ill;he was in a feverish state, sometimes delirious, sometimes halfconscious. He remembered a great deal afterwards. Sometimes itseemed as though there were a number of people round him; theywanted to take him away somewhere, there was a great deal ofsquabbling and discussing about him. Then he would be alone in theroom; they had all gone away afraid of him, and only now and thenopened the door a crack to look at him; they threatened him, plottedsomething together, laughed, and mocked at him. He remembered Nastasyaoften at his bedside; he distinguished another person, too, whom heseemed to know very well, though he could not remember who he was, andthis fretted him, even made him cry. Sometimes he fancied he hadbeen lying there a month; at other times it all seemed part of thesame day. But of that- of that he had no recollection, and yet everyminute he felt that he had forgotten something he ought to remember.He worried and tormented himself trying to remember, moaned, flew intoa rage, or sank into awful, intolerable terror. Then he struggled toget up, would have run away, but some one always prevented him byforce, and he sank back into impotence and forgetfulness. At last hereturned to complete consciousness.

　　It happened at ten o'clock in the morning. On fine days the sunshone into the room at that hour, throwing a streak of light on theright wall and the corner near the door. Nastasya was standingbeside him with another person, a complete stranger, who was lookingat him very inquisitively. He was a young man with a beard, wearinga full, short-waisted coat, and looked like a messenger. Thelandlady was peeping in at the half-opened door. Raskolnikov sat up.

　　"Who is this, Nastasya?" he asked, pointing to the young man.

　　"I say, he's himself again!" she said.

　　"He is himself," echoed the man.

　　Concluding that he had returned to his senses, the landlady closedthe door and disappeared. She was always shy and dreaded conversationsor discussions. She was a woman of forty, not at all bad-looking,fat and buxom, with black eyes and eyebrows, good-natured from fatnessand laziness, and absurdly bashful.

　　"Who... are you?" he went on, addressing the man. But at that momentthe door was flung open, and, stooping a little, as he was so tall,Razumihin came in.

　　"What a cabin it is!" he cried. "I am always knocking my head. Youcall this a lodging! So you are conscious, brother? I've just heardthe news from Pashenka."

　　"He has just come to," said Nastasya.

　　"Just come to," echoed the man again, with a smile.

　　"And who are you?" Razumihin asked, suddenly addressing him. "Myname is Vrazumihin, at your service; not Razumihin, as I am alwayscalled, but Vrazumihin, a student and gentleman; and he is myfriend. And who are you?"

　　"I am the messenger from our office, from the merchant Shelopaev,and I've come on business."

　　"Please sit down." Razumihin seated himself on the other side of thetable. "It's a good thing you've come to, brother," he went on toRaskolnikov. "For the last four days you have scarcely eaten ordrunk anything. We had to give you tea in spoonfuls. I broughtZossimov to see you twice. You remember Zossimov? He examined youcarefully and said at once it was nothing serious- something seemed tohave gone to your head. Some nervous nonsense, the result of badfeeding, he says you have not had enough beer and radish, but it'snothing much, it will pass and you will be all right. Zossimov is afirst-rate fellow! He is making quite a name. Come, I won't keep you,"he said, addressing the man again. "Will you explain what you want?You must know, Rodya, this is the second time they have sent fromthe office; but it was another man last time, and I talked to him. Whowas it came before?"

　　"That was the day before yesterday, I venture to say, if you please,sir. That was Alexey Semyonovitch; he is in our office, too."

　　"He was more intelligent than you, don't you think so?"

　　"Yes, indeed, sir, he is of more weight than I am."

　　"Quite so; go on."

　　"At your mamma's request, through Afanasy Ivanovitch Vahrushin, ofwhom I presume you have heard more than once, a remittance is sentto you from our office," the man began, addressing Raskolnikov. "Ifyou are in an intelligible condition, I've thirty-five roubles toremit to you, as Semyon Semyonovitch has received from AfanasyIvanovitch at your mamma's request instructions to that effect, ason previous occasions. Do you know him, sir?"

　　"Yes, I remember... Vahrushin," Raskolnikov said dreamily.

　　"You hear, he knows Vahrushin," cried Razumihin. "He is in 'anintelligible condition'! And I see you are an intelligent man too.Well, it's always pleasant to hear words of wisdom."

　　"That's the gentleman, Vahrushin, Afanasy Ivanovitch. And at therequest of your mamma, who has sent you a remittance once before inthe same manner through him, he did not refuse this time also, andsent instructions to Semyon Semyonovitch some days since to hand youthirty-five roubles in the hope of better to come."

　　"That 'hoping for better to come' is the best thing you've said,though 'your mamma' is not bad either. Come then, what do you say?Is he fully conscious, eh?"

　　"That's all right. If only he can sign this little paper."

　　"He can scrawl his name. Have you got the book?"

　　"Yes, here's the book."

　　"Give it to me. Here, Rodya, sit up. I'll hold you. Take the pen andscribble 'Raskolnikov' for him. For just now, brother, money issweeter to us than treacle."

　　"I don't want it," said Raskolnikov, pushing away the pen.

　　"Not want it?"

　　"I won't sign it."

　　"How the devil can you do without signing it?"

　　"I don't want... the money."

　　"Don't want the money! Come, brother, that's nonsense, I bearwitness. Don't trouble, please, it's only that he is on his travelsagain. But that's pretty common with him at all times though.... Youare a man of judgment and we will take him in hand, that is, moresimply, take his hand and he will sign it. Here."

　　"But I can come another time."

　　"No, no. Why should we trouble you? You are a man of judgment....Now, Rodya, don't keep your visitor, you see he is waiting," and hemade ready to hold Raskolnikov's hand in earnest.

　　"Stop, I'll do it alone," said the latter, taking the pen andsigning his name.

　　The messenger took out the money and went away.

　　"Bravo! And now, brother, are you hungry?"

　　"Yes," answered Raskolnikov.

　　"Is there any soup?"

　　"Some of yesterday's," answered Nastasya, who was still standingthere.

　　"With potatoes and rice in it?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I know it by heart. Bring soup and give us some tea."

　　"Very well."

　　Raskolnikov looked at all this with profound astonishment and adull, unreasoning terror. He made up his mind to keep quiet and seewhat would happen. "I believe I am not wandering. I believe it'sreality," he thought.

　　In a couple of minutes Nastasya returned with the soup, andannounced that the tea would be ready directly. With the soup shebrought two spoons, two plates, salt, pepper, mustard for the beef,and so on. The table was set as it had not been for a long time. Thecloth was clean.

　　"It would not be amiss, Nastasya, if Praskovya Pavlovna were to sendus up a couple of bottles of beer. We could empty them."

　　"Well, you are a cool hand," muttered Nastasya, and she departedto carry out his orders.

　　Raskolnikov still gazed wildly with strained attention. MeanwhileRazumihin sat down on the sofa beside him, as clumsily as a bear puthis left arm round Raskolnikov's head, although he was able to sit up,and with his right hand gave him a spoonful of soup, blowing on itthat it might not burn him. But the soup was only just warm.Raskolnikov swallowed one spoonful greedily, then a second, then athird. But after giving him a few more spoonfuls of soup, Razumihinsuddenly stopped, and said that he must ask Zossimov whether heought to have more.

　　Nastasya came in with two bottles of beer.

　　"And will you have tea?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Cut along, Nastasya, and bring some tea, for tea we may ventureon without the faculty. But here is the beer!" He moved back to hischair, pulled the soup and meat in front of him, and began eating asthough he had not touched food for three days.

　　"I must tell you, Rodya, I dine like this here every day now," hemumbled with his mouth full of beef, "and it's all Pashenka, your dearlittle landlady, who sees to that; she loves to do anything for me.I don't ask for it, but, of course, I don't object. And here'sNastasya with the tea. She is a quick girl. Nastasya, my dear, won'tyou have some beer?"

　　"Get along with your nonsense!"

　　"A cup of tea, then?"

　　"A cup of tea, maybe."

　　"Pour it out. Stay, I'll pour it out myself. Sit down."

　　He poured out two cups, left his dinner, and sat on the sofaagain. As before, he put his left arm round the sick man's head,raised him up and gave him tea in spoonfuls, again blowing eachspoonful steadily and earnestly, as though this process was theprincipal and most effective means towards his friend's recovery.Raskolnikov said nothing and made no resistance, though he feltquite strong enough to sit up on the sofa without support and couldnot merely have held a cup or a spoon, but even perhaps could havewalked about. But from some queer, almost animal, cunning he conceivedthe idea of hiding his strength and lying low for a time, pretendingif necessary not to be yet in full possession of his faculties, andmeanwhile listening to find out what was going on. Yet he could notovercome his sense of repugnance. After sipping a dozen spoonfuls oftea, he suddenly released his head, pushed the spoon awaycapriciously, and sank back on the pillow. There were actually realpillows under his head now, down pillows in clean cases, he observedthat, too, and took note of it.

　　"Pashenka must give us some raspberry jam to-day to make him someraspberry tea," said Razumihin, going back to his chair andattacking his soup and beer again.

　　"And where is she to get raspberries for you?" asked Nastasya,balancing a saucer on her five outspread fingers and sipping teathrough a lump of sugar.

　　"She'll get it at the shop, my dear. You see, Rodya, all sorts ofthings have been happening while you have been laid up. When youdecamped in that rascally way without leaving your address, I feltso angry that I resolved to find you out and punish you. I set to workthat very day. How I ran about making inquiries for you! Thislodging of yours I had forgotten, though I never remembered it,indeed, because I did not know it; and as for your old lodgings, Icould only remember it was at the Five Corners, Harlamov's house. Ikept trying to find that Harlamov's house, and afterwards it turnedout that it was not Harlamov's, but Buch's. How one muddles up soundsometimes! So I lost my temper, and I went on the chance to theaddress bureau next day, and only fancy, in two minutes they lookedyou up! Your name is down there."

　　"My name!"

　　"I should think so; and yet a General Kobelev they could not findwhile I was there. Well, it's a long story. But as soon as I didland on this place, I soon got to know all your affairs- all, all,brother, I know everything; Nastasya here will tell you. I made theacquaintance of Nikodim Fomitch and Ilya Petrovitch, and thehouse-porter and Mr. Zametov, Alexandr Grigorievitch, the head clerkin the police office, and, last, but not least, of Pashenka;Nastasya here knows...."

　　"He's got round her," Nastasya murmured, smiling slyly.

　　"Why don't you put the sugar in your tea, Nastasya Nikiforovna?"

　　"You are a one!" Nastasya cried suddenly, going off into a giggle."I am not Nikiforovna, but Petrovna," she added suddenly, recoveringfrom her mirth.

　　"I'll make a note of it. Well, brother, to make a long storyshort, I was going in for a regular explosion here to uproot allmalignant influences in the locality, but Pashenka won the day. Ihad not expected, brother, to find her so... prepossessing. Eh, whatdo you think?"

　　Raskolnikov did not speak, but he still kept his eyes fixed uponhim, full of alarm.

　　"And all that could be wished, indeed, in every respect,"Razumihin went on, not at all embarrassed by his silence.

　　"Ah, the sly dog!" Nastasya shrieked again. This conversationafforded her unspeakable delight.

　　"It's a pity, brother, that you did not set to work in the right wayat first. You ought to have approached her differently. She is, soto speak, a most unaccountable character. But we will talk about hercharacter later.... How could you let things come to such a passthat she gave up sending you your dinner? And that I.O.U.? You musthave been mad to sign an I.O.U. And that promise of marriage whenher daughter, Natalya Yegorovna, was alive?... I know all about it!But I see that's a delicate matter and I am an ass; forgive me. But,talking of foolishness, do you know Praskovya Pavlovna is not nearlyso foolish as you would think at first sight?"

　　"No," mumbled Raskolnikov, looking away, but feeling that it wasbetter to keep up the conversation.

　　"She isn't, is she?" cried Razumihin, delighted to get an answer outof him. "But she is not very clever either, eh? She is essentially,essentially an unaccountable character! I am sometimes quite at aloss, I assure you.... She must be forty; she says she isthirty-six, and of course she has every right to say so. But I swear Ijudge her intellectually, simply from the metaphysical point ofview; there is a sort of symbolism sprung up between us, a sort ofalgebra or what not! I don't understand it! Well, that's all nonsense.Only, seeing that you are not a student now and have lost your lessonsand your clothes, and that through the young lady's death she has noneed to treat you as a relation, she suddenly took fright; and asyou hid in your den and dropped all your old relations with her, sheplanned to get rid of you. And she's been cherishing that design along time, but was sorry to lose the I.O.U. for you assured heryourself that your mother would pay."

　　"It was base of me to say that.... My mother herself is almost abeggar... and I told a lie to keep my lodging... and be fed,"Raskolnikov said loudly and distinctly.

　　"Yes, you did very sensibly. But the worst of it is that at thatpoint Mr. Tchebarov turns up, a business man. Pashenka would neverhave thought of doing anything on her own account, she is tooretiring; but the business man is by no means retiring, and firstthing he puts the question, 'Is there any hope of realising theI.O.U.?' Answer: there is, because he has a mother who would saveher Rodya with her hundred and twenty-five roubles pension, if she hasto starve herself; and a sister, too, who would go into bondage forhis sake. That's what he was building upon.... Why do you start? Iknow all the ins and outs of your affairs now, my dear boy- it's notfor nothing that you were so open with Pashenka when you were herprospective son-in-law, and I say all this as a friend.... But Itell you what it is; an honest and sensitive man is open; and abusiness man 'listens and goes on eating' you up. Well, then shegave the I.O.U. by way of payment to this Tchebarov, and withouthesitation he made a formal demand for payment. When I heard of allthis I wanted to blow him up, too, to clear my conscience, but by thattime harmony reigned between me and Pashenka, and I insisted onstopping the whole affair, engaging that you would pay. I wentsecurity for you, brother. Do you understand? We called Tchebarov,flung him ten roubles and got the I.O.U. back from him, and here Ihave the honour of presenting it to you. She trusts your word now.Here, take it, you see I have torn it."

　　Razumihin put the note on the table. Raskolnikov looked at him andturned to the wall without uttering a word. Even Razumihin felt atwinge.

　　"I see, brother," he said a moment later, "that I have beenplaying the fool again. I thought I should amuse you with mychatter, and I believe I have only made you cross."

　　"Was it you I did not recognise when I was delirious?" Raskolnikovasked, after a moment's pause without turning his head.

　　"Yes, and you flew into a rage about it, especially when I broughtZametov one day."

　　"Zametov? The head clerk? What for?" Raskolnikov turned roundquickly and fixed his eyes on Razumihin.

　　"What's the matter with you?... What are you upset about? Hewanted to make your acquaintance because I talked to him a lot aboutyou.... How could I have found out so much except from him? He is acapital fellow, brother, first-rate... in his own way, of course.Now we are friends- see each other almost every day. I have moved intothis part, you know. I have only just moved. I've been with him toLuise Ivanovna once or twice.... Do you remember Luise, LuiseIvanovna?

　　"Did I say anything in delirium?"

　　"I should think so! You were beside yourself."

　　"What did I rave about?"

　　"What next? What did you rave about? What people do rave about....Well, brother, now I must not lose time. To work." He got up fromthe table and took up his cap.

　　"What did I rave about?"

　　"How he keeps on! Are you afraid of having let out some secret?Don't worry yourself; you said nothing about a countess. But yousaid a lot about a bulldog, and about ear-rings and chains, andabout Krestovsky Island, and some porter, and Nikodim Fomitch and IlyaPetrovitch, the assistant superintendent. And another thing that wasof special interest to you was your own sock. You whined, 'Give memy sock.' Zametov hunted all about your room for your socks, andwith his own scented, ring-bedecked fingers he gave you the rag. Andonly then were you comforted, and for the next twenty-four hours youheld the wretched thing in your hand; we could not get it from you. Itis most likely somewhere under your quilt at this moment. And then youasked so piteously for fringe for your trousers. We tried to findout what sort of fringe, but we could not make it out. Now tobusiness! Here are thirty-five roubles; I take ten of them, andshall give you an account of them in an hour or two. I will letZossimov know at the same time, though he ought to have been here longago, for it is nearly twelve. And you, Nastasya, look in prettyoften while I am away, to see whether he wants a drink or anythingelse. And I will tell Pashenka what is wanted myself. Good-bye!"

　　"He calls her Pashenka! Ah, he's a deep one!" said Nastasya as hewent out; then she opened the door and stood listening, but couldnot resist running downstairs after him. She was very eager to hearwhat he would say to the landlady. She was evidently quitefascinated by Razumihin.

　　No sooner had she left the room than the sick man flung off thebedclothes and leapt out of bed like a madman. With burning, switchingimpatience he had waited for them to be gone so that he might set towork. But to what work? Now, as though to spite him, it eluded him.

　　"Good God, only tell me one thing: do they know of it yet or not?What if they know it and are only pretending, mocking me while I amlaid up, and then they will come in and tell me that it's beendiscovered long ago and that they have only... What am I to do now?That's what I've forgotten, as though on purpose; forgotten it allat once, I remembered a minute ago."

　　He stood in the middle of the room and gazed in miserablebewilderment about him; he walked to the door, opened it, listened;but that was not what he wanted. Suddenly, as though recallingsomething, he rushed to the corner where there was a hole under thepaper, began examining it, put his hand into the hole, fumbled- butthat was not it. He went to the stove, opened it and began rummagingin the ashes; the frayed edges of his trousers and the rags cut offhis pocket were lying there just as he had thrown them. No one hadlooked, then! Then he remembered, the sock about which Razumihin hadjust been telling him. Yes, there it lay on the sofa under thequilt, but it was so covered with dust and grime that Zametov couldnot have seen anything on it.

　　"Bah, Zametov! The police office! And why am I sent for to thepolice office? Where's the notice? Bah! I am mixing it up; that wasthen. I looked at my sock then, too, but now... now I have been ill.But what did Zametov come for? Why did Razumihin bring him?" hemuttered, helplessly sitting on the sofa again. "What does it mean? AmI still in delirium, or is it real? I believe it is real.... Ah, Iremember, I must escape! Make haste to escape. Yes, I must, I mustescape! Yes... but where? And where are my clothes? I've no boots.They've taken them away! They've hidden them! I understand! Ah, hereis my coat- they passed that over! And here is money on the table,thank God! And here's the I.O.U.... I'll take the money and go andtake another lodging. They won't find me!... Yes, but the addressbureau? They'll find me, Razumihin will find me. Better escapealtogether... far away... to America, and let them do their worst! Andtake the I.O.U.... it would be of use there.... What else shall Itake? They think I am ill! They don't know that I can walk,ha-ha-ha! I could see by their eyes that they know all about it! Ifonly I could get downstairs! And what if they have set a watchthere- policemen! What's this tea? Ah, and here is beer left, half abottle, cold!"

　　He snatched up the bottle, which still contained a glassful of beer,and gulped it down with relish, as though quenching a flame in hisbreast. But in another minute the beer had gone to his head, and afaint and even pleasant shiver ran down his spine. He lay down andpulled the quilt over him. His sick and incoherent thoughts grewmore and more disconnected, and soon a light, pleasant drowsiness cameupon him. With a sense of comfort he nestled his head in the pillow,wrapped more closely about him the soft, wadded quilt which hadreplaced the old, ragged great-coat, sighed softly and sank into adeep, sound, refreshing sleep.

　　He woke up, hearing some one come in. He opened his eyes and sawRazumihin standing in the doorway, uncertain whether to come in ornot. Raskolnikov sat up quickly on the sofa and gazed at him, asthough trying to recall something.

　　"Ah, you are not asleep! Here I am! Nastasya, bring in theparcel!" Razumihin shouted down the stairs. "You shall have theaccount directly."

　　"What time is it?" asked Raskolnikov, looking round uneasily.

　　"Yes, you had a fine sleep, brother, it's almost evening, it will besix o'clock directly. You have slept more than six hours."

　　"Good heaven! Have I?"

　　"And why not? It will do you good. What's the hurry? A tryst, is it?We've all time before us. I've been waiting for the last three hoursfor you; I've been up twice and found you asleep. I've called onZossimov twice; not at home, only fancy! But no matter, he will turnup. And I've been out on my own business, too. You know I've beenmoving to-day, moving with my uncle. I have an uncle living with menow. But that's no matter, to business. Give me the parcel,Nastasya. We will open it directly. And how do you feel now, brother?"

　　"I am quite well, I am not ill. Razumihin, have you been here long?"

　　"I tell you I've been waiting for the last three hours."

　　"No, before."

　　"How do you mean?"

　　"How long have you been coming here?"

　　"Why I told you all about it this morning. Don't you remember?"

　　Raskolnikov pondered. The morning seemed like a dream to him. Hecould not remember alone, and looked inquiringly at Razumihin.

　　"Hm!" said the latter, "he has forgotten. I fancied then that youwere not quite yourself. Now you are better for your sleep.... Youreally look much better. First rate! Well, to business. Look here,my dear boy."

　　He began untying the bundle, which evidently interested him.

　　"Believe me, brother, this is something specially near my heart. Forwe must make a man of you. Let's begin from the top. Do you see thiscap?" he said, taking out of the bundle a fairly good, though cheap,and ordinary cap. "Let me try it on."

　　"Presently, afterwards," said Raskolnikov, waving it of pettishly.

　　"Come, Rodya, my boy, don't oppose it, afterwards will be toolate; and I shan't sleep all night, for I bought it by guess,without measure. Just right!" he cried triumphantly, fitting it on,"just your size! A proper head-covering is the first thing in dressand a recommendation in its own way. Tolstyakov, a friend of mine,is always obliged to take off his pudding basin when he goes intoany public place where other people wear their hats or caps. Peoplethink he does it from slavish politeness, but it's simply because heis ashamed of his bird's nest; he is such a bashful fellow! Look,Nastasya, here are two specimens of headgear: this Palmerston"- hetook from the corner Raskolnikov's old, battered hat, which for someunknown reason, he called a Palmerston- "or this jewel! Guess theprice, Rodya, what do you suppose I paid for it, Nastasya!" he said,turning to her, seeing that Raskolnikov did not speak.

　　"Twenty copecks, no more, I dare say," answered Nastasya.

　　"Twenty copecks, silly!" he cried, offended. "Why, nowadays youwould cost more than that- eighty copecks! And that only because ithas been worn. And it's bought on condition that when's it's worn out,they will give you another next year. Yes, on my word! Well, now letus pass to the United States of America, as they called them atschool. I assure you I am proud of these breeches," and he exhibitedto Raskolnikov a pair of light, summer trousers of grey woollenmaterial. "No holes, no spots, and quite respectable, although alittle worn; and a waistcoat to match, quite in the fashion. And itsbeing worn really is an improvement, it's softer, smoother.... Yousee, Rodya, to my thinking, the great thing for getting on in theworld is always to keep to the seasons; if you don't insist onhaving asparagus in January, you keep your money in your purse! andit's the same with this purchase. It's summer now, so I've been buyingsummer things- warmer materials will be wanted for autumn, so you willhave to throw these away in any case... especially as they will bedone for by then from their own lack of coherence if not your higherstandard of luxury. Come, price them! What do you say? Two roublestwenty-five copecks! And remember the conditions: if you wear theseout, you will have another suit for nothing! They only do businesson that system at Fedyaev's; if you've bought a thing once, you aresatisfied for life, for you will never go there again of your own freewill. Now for the boots. What do you say? You see that they are abit worn, but they'll last a couple of months, for it's foreign workand foreign leather; the secretary of the English Embassy sold themlast week- he had only worn them six days, but he was very short ofcash. Price- a rouble and a half. A bargain?"

　　"But perhaps they won't fit," observed Nastasya.

　　"Not fit? Just look!" and he pulled out of his pocketRaskolnikov's old, broken boot, stiffly coated with dry mud. "I didnot go empty-handed- they took the size from this monster. We alldid our best. And as to your linen, your landlady has seen to that.Here, to begin with are three shirts, hempen but with a fashionablefront.... Well now then, eighty copecks the cap, two roublestwenty-five copecks the suit- together three roubles five copecks- arouble and a half for the boots- for, you see, they are very good- andthat makes four roubles fifty-five copecks; five roubles for theunderclothes- they were bought in the lot- which makes exactly nineroubles fifty-five copecks. Forty-five copecks change in coppers. Willyou take it? And so, Rodya, you are set up with a complete newrig-out, for your overcoat will serve, and even has a style of itsown. That comes from getting one's clothes from Sharmer's! As for yoursocks and other things, I leave them to you; we've twenty-five roublesleft. And as for Pashenka and paying for your lodging, don't youworry. I tell you she'll trust you for anything. And now, brother, letme change your linen, for I daresay you will throw off your illnesswith your shirt."

　　"Let me be! I don't want to!" Raskolnikov waved him off. He hadlistened with disgust to Razumihin's efforts to be playful about hispurchases.

　　"Come, brother, don't tell me I've been trudging around fornothing," Razumihin insisted. "Nastasya, don't be bashful, but helpme- that's it," and in spite of Raskolnikov's resistance he changedhis linen. The latter sank back on the pillows and for a minute or twosaid nothing.

　　"It will be long before I get rid of them," he thought. "Whatmoney was all that bought with?" he asked at last, gazing at the wall.

　　"Money? Why, your own, what the messenger brought from Vahrushin,your mother sent it. Have you forgotten that, too?"

　　"I remember now," said Raskolnikov after a long, sullen silence.Razumihin looked at him, frowning and uneasy.

　　The door opened and a tall, stout man whose appearance seemedfamiliar to Raskolnikov came in.

　　"Zossimov! At last!" cried Razumihin, delighted.

　　Chapter Four

　　ZOSSIMOV WAS a tall, fat man with a puffy, colourless,clean-shaven face and straight flaxen hair. He wore spectacles, anda big gold ring on his fat finger. He was twenty-seven. He had on alight grey fashionable loose coat, light summer trousers, andeverything about him loose, fashionable and spick and able, hislinen was irreproachable, his watch-chain was massive. In manner hewas slow and, as it were, nonchalant, and at the same timestudiously free and easy; he made efforts to conceal hisself-importance, but it was apparent at every instant. All hisacquaintances found him tedious, but said he was clever at his work.

　　"I've been to you twice to-day, brother. You see, he's come tohimself," cried Razumihin.

　　"I see, I see; and how do we feel now, eh?" said Zossimov toRaskolnikov, watching him carefully and, sitting down at the foot ofthe sofa, he settled himself as comfortably as he could.

　　"He is still depressed," Razumihin went on. "We've just changedhis linen and he almost cried."

　　"That's very natural; you might have put it off if he did not wishit.... His pulse is first-rate. Is your head still aching, eh?"

　　"I am well, I am perfectly well!" Raskolnikov declared positivelyand irritably. He raised himself on the sofa and looked at them withglittering eyes, but sank back on to the pillow at once and turnedto the wall. Zossimov watched him intently.

　　"Very good.... Going on all right," he said lazily. "Has he eatenanything?"

　　They told him, and asked what he might have.

　　"He may have anything... soup, tea... mushrooms and cucumbers, ofcourse, you must not give him; he'd better not have meat either,and... but no need to tell you that!" Razumihin and he looked ateach other. "No more medicine or anything. I'll look at him againto-morrow. Perhaps, to-day even... but never mind..."

　　"To-morrow evening I shall take him for a walk," said Razumihin. "Weare going to the Yusupov garden and then to the Palais de Crystal."

　　"I would not disturb him to-morrow at all, but I don't know... alittle, maybe... but we'll see."

　　"Ach, what a nuisance! I've got a house-warming party tonight;it's only a step from here. Couldn't he come? He could lie on thesofa. You are coming?" Razumihin said to Zossimov. "Don't forget,you promised."

　　"All right, only rather later. What are you going to do?"

　　"Oh, nothing- tea, vodka, herrings. There will be a pie... justour friends."

　　"And who?"

　　"All neighbours here, almost all new friends, except my old uncle,and he is new too- he only arrived in Petersburg yesterday to see tosome business of his. We meet once in five years."

　　"What is he?"

　　"He's been stagnating all his life as a district postmaster; getsa little pension. He is sixty-five- not worth talking about.... ButI am fond of him. Porfiry Petrovitch, the head of the InvestigationDepartment here... But you know him."

　　"Is he a relation of yours, too?"

　　"A very distant one. But why are you scowling? Because youquarrelled once, won't you come then?"

　　"I don't care a damn for him."

　　"So much the better. Well, there will be some students, a teacher, agovernment clerk, a musician, an officer and Zametov."

　　"Do tell me, please, what you or he"- Zossimov nodded atRaskolnikov- "can have in common with this Zametov?"

　　"Oh, you particular gentleman! Principles! You are worked byprinciples, as it were by springs; you won't venture to turn roundon your own account. If a man is a nice fellow, that's the onlyprinciple I go upon, Zametov is a delightful person."

　　"Though he does take bribes."

　　"Well, he does! and what of it? I don't care if he does takebribes," Razumihin cried with unnatural irritability. "I don'tpraise him for taking bribes. I only say he is a nice man in his ownway! But if one looks at men in all ways- are there many good onesleft? Why, I am sure I shouldn't be worth a baked onion myself...perhaps with you thrown in."

　　"That's too little; I'd give two for you."

　　"And I wouldn't give more than one for you. No more of your jokes!Zametov is no more than a boy. I can pull his hair and one must drawhim not repel him. You'll never improve a man by repelling him,especially a boy. One has to be twice as careful with a boy. Oh, youprogressive dullards! You don't understand. You harm yourselvesrunning another man down.... But if you want to know, we really havesomething in common."

　　"I should like to know what."

　　"Why, it's all about a house-painter.... We are getting him out of amess! Though indeed there's nothing to fear now. The matter isabsolutely self-evident. We only put on steam."

　　"A painter?"

　　"Why, haven't I told you about it? I only told you the beginningthen about the murder of the old pawnbroker-woman. Well, the painteris mixed up in it..."

　　"Oh, I heard about that murder before and was rather interested init... partly... for one reason.... I read about it in the papers,too...."

　　"Lizaveta was murdered, too," Nastasya blurted out, suddenlyaddressing Raskolnikov. She remained in the room all the time,standing by the door listening.

　　"Lizaveta," murmured Raskolnikov hardly audibly.

　　"Lizaveta, who sold old clothes. Didn't you know her? She used tocome here. She mended a shirt for you, too."

　　Raskolnikov turned to the wall where in the dirty, yellow paper hepicked out one clumsy, white flower with brown lines on it and beganexamining how many petals there were in it, how many scallops in thepetals and how many lines on them. He felt his arms and legs aslifeless as though they had been cut off. He did not attempt tomove, but stared obstinately at the flower.

　　"But what about the painter?" Zossimov interrupted Nastasya'schatter with marked displeasure. She sighed and was silent.

　　"Why, he was accused of the murder," Razumihin went on hotly.

　　"Was there evidence against him then?"

　　"Evidence, indeed! Evidence that was no evidence, and that's what wehave to prove. It was just as they pitched on those fellows, Kochand Pestryakov, at first. Foo! how stupidly it's all done, it makesone sick, though it's not one's business! Pestryakov may be comingto-night.... By the way, Rodya, you've heard about the businessalready; it happened before you were ill, the day before you faintedat the police office while they were talking about it."

　　Zossimov looked curiously at Raskolnikov. He did not stir.

　　"But I say, Razumihin, I wonder at you. What a busybody you are!"Zossimov observed.

　　"Maybe I am, but we will get him off anyway," shouted Razumihin,bringing his fist down on the table. "What's the most offensive is nottheir lying- one can always forgive lying- lying is a delightfulthing, for it leads to truth- what is offensive is that they lie andworship their own lying.... I respect Porfiry, but... What threwthem out at first? The door was locked, and when they came back withthe porter it was open. So it followed that Koch and Pestryakov werethe murderers- that was their logic!"

　　"But don't excite yourself; they simply detained them, they couldnot help that.... And, by the way, I've met that man Koch. He usedto buy unredeemed pledges from the old woman? Eh?"

　　"Yes, he is a swindler. He buys up bad debts, too. He makes aprofession of it. But enough of him! Do you know what makes meangry? It's their sickening rotten, petrified routine.... And thiscase might be the means of introducing a new method. One can show fromthe psychological data alone how to get on the track of the realman. 'We have facts,' they say. But facts are not everything- at leasthalf the business lies in how you interpret them!"

　　"Can you interpret them, then?"

　　"Anyway, one can't hold one's tongue when one has a feeling, atangible feeling, that one might be a help if only.... Eh! Do you knowthe details of the case?"

　　"I am waiting to hear about the painter."

　　"Oh, yes! Well, here's the story. Early on the third day after themurder, when they were still dandling Koch and Pestryakov- though theyaccounted for every step they took and it was as plain as a pikestaff-an unexpected fact turned up. A peasant called Dushkin, who keeps adram-shop facing the house, brought to the police office ajeweller's case containing some gold ear-rings, and told a longrigamarole. 'The day before yesterday, just after eight o'clock'- markthe day and the hour!- 'a journeyman house-painter, Nikolay, who hadbeen in to see me already that day, brought me this box of goldear-rings and stones, and asked me to give him two roubles for them.When I asked him where he got them, he said that he picked them upin the street. I did not ask him anything more.' I am telling youDushkin's story. 'I gave him a note'- a rouble that is- 'for I thoughtif he did not pawn it with me he would with another. It would all cometo the same thing- he'd spend it on drink, so the thing had betterbe with me. The further you hide it the quicker you will find it,and if anything turns up, if I hear any rumours, I'll take it to thepolice.' Of course, that's all taradiddle; he lies like a horse, for Iknow this Dushkin, he is a pawnbroker and a receiver of stolengoods, and he did not cheat Nikolay out of a thirty-rouble trinketin order to give it to the police. He was simply afraid. But nomatter, to return to Dushkin's story. 'I've known this peasant,Nikolay Dementyev, from a child; he comes from the same province anddistrict of Zaraisk, we are both Ryazan men. And though Nikolay is nota drunkard, he drinks, and I knew he had a job in that house, paintingwork with Dmitri, who comes from the same village, too. As soon ashe got the rouble he changed it, had a couple of glasses, took hischange and went out. But I did not see Dmitri with him then. And thenext day I heard that some one had murdered Alyona Ivanovna and hersister, Lizaveta Ivanovna, with an axe. I knew them, and I feltsuspicious about the ear-rings at once, for I knew the murderedwoman lent money on pledges. I went to the house, and began to makecareful inquiries without saying a word to any one. First of all Iasked, "Is Nikolay here?" Dmitri told me that Nikolay had gone offon the spree; he had come home at daybreak drunk, stayed in thehouse about ten minutes, and went out again. Dmitri didn't see himagain and is finishing the job alone. And their job is on the samestaircase as the murder, on the second floor. When I heard all thatI did not say a word to any one'- that's Dushkin's tale- 'but Ifound out what I could about the murder, and went home feeling assuspicious as ever. And at eight o'clock this morning'- that was thethird day, you understand- 'I saw Nikolay coming in, not sober, thoughnot so very drunk- he could understand what was said to him. He satdown on the bench and did not speak. There was only one stranger inthe bar and a man I knew asleep on a bench and our two boys. "Have youseen Dmitri?" said I. "No, I haven't," said he. "And you've not beenhere either?" "Not since the day before yesterday," said he. "Andwhere did you sleep last night?" "In Peski, with the Kolomenskymen." "And where did you get those ear-rings?" I asked. "I foundthem in the street," and the way he said it was a bit queer; he didnot look at me. "Did you hear what happened that very evening, at thatvery hour, on that same staircase?" said I. "No," said he, "I hadnot heard," and all the while he was listening, his eyes werestaring out of his head and he turned as white as chalk. I told himall about it and he took his hat and began getting up. I wanted tokeep him. "Wait a bit, Nikolay," said I, "won't you have a drink?" AndI signed to the boy to hold the door, and I came out from behind thebar; but he darted out and down the street to the turning at a run.I have not seen him since. Then my doubts were at an end- it was hisdoing, as clear as could be...."

　　"I should think so," said Zossimov.

　　"Wait! Hear the end. Of course they sought high and low for Nikolay;they detained Dushkin and searched his house; Dmitri, too, wasarrested; the Kolomensky men also were turned inside out. And theday before yesterday they arrested Nikolay in a tavern at the end ofthe town. He had gone there, taken the silver cross off his neck andasked for a dram for it. They gave it to him. A few minutes afterwardsthe woman went to the cowshed, and through a crack in the wall she sawin the stable adjoining he had made a noose of his sash from the beam,stood on a block of wood, and was trying to put his neck in the noose.The woman screeched her hardest; people ran in. 'So that's what youare up to!' 'Take me,' he says, 'to such-and-such a police officer;I'll confess everything.' Well, they took him to that policestation- that is here- with a suitable escort. So they asked himthis and that, how old he is, 'twenty-two,' and so on. At thequestion, 'When you were working with Dmitri, didn't you see any oneon the staircase at such-and-such a time?'- answer: 'To be surefolks may have gone up and down, but I did not notice them.' 'Anddidn't you hear anything, any noise, and so on?' 'We heard nothingspecial.' 'And did you hear, Nikolay, that on the same day WidowSo-and-so and her sister were murdered and robbed?' 'I never knew athing about it. The first I heard of it was from Afanasy Pavlovitchthe day before yesterday.' 'And where did you find the ear-rings?''I found them on the pavement. "Why didn't you go to work withDmitri the other day?' 'Because I was drinking.' 'And where were youdrinking?' 'Oh, in such-and-such a place.' 'Why did you run awayfrom Dushkin's?' 'Because I was awfully frightened.' 'What were youfrightened of?' 'That I should be accused.' 'How could you befrightened, if you felt free from guilt?' Now, Zossimov, you may notbelieve me, that question was put literally in those words. I knowit for a fact, it was repeated to me exactly! What do you say tothat?"

　　"Well, anyway, there's the evidence."

　　"I am not talking of the evidence now, I am talking about thatquestion, of their own idea of themselves. Well, so they squeezedand squeezed him and he confessed: 'I did not find it in the street,but in the flat where I was painting with Dmitri.' 'And how was that?''Why, Dmitri and I were painting there all day, and we were justgetting ready to go, and Dmitri took a brush and painted my face,and he ran off and I after him. I ran after him, shouting myhardest, and at the bottom of the stairs I ran right against theporter and some gentlemen- and how many gentlemen were there I don'tremember. And the porter swore at me, and the other porter swore, too,and the porter's wife came out, and swore at us, too; and agentleman came into the entry with a lady, and he swore at us, too,for Dmitri and I lay right across the way. I got hold of Dmitri's hairand knocked him down and began beating him. And Dmitri, too, caught meby the hair and began beating me. But we did it all not for temper,but in a friendly way, for sport. And then Dmitri escaped and ran intothe street, and I ran after him; but I did not catch him, and wentback to the flat alone; I had to clear up my things. I began puttingthem together, expecting Dmitri to come, and there in the passage,in the corner by the door, I stepped on the box. I saw it lyingthere wrapped up in paper. I took off the paper, saw some littlehooks, undid them, and in the box were the ear-rings....'"

　　"Behind the door? Lying behind the door? Behind the door?"Raskolnikov cried suddenly, staring with a blank look of terror atRazumihin, and he slowly sat up on the sofa, leaning on his hand.

　　"Yes... why? What's the matter? What's wrong?" Razumihin, too, gotup from his seat.

　　"Nothing," Raskolnikov answered faintly, turning to the wall. Allwere silent for a while.

　　"He must have waked from a dream," Razumihin said at last, lookinginquiringly at Zossimov. The latter slightly shook his head.

　　"Well, go on," said Zossimov. "What next?"

　　"What next? As soon as he saw the ear-rings, forgetting Dmitri andeverything, he took up his cap and ran to Dushkin and, as we know, gota rouble from him. He told a lie saying he found them in the street,and went off drinking. He keeps repeating his old story about themurder: 'I knew nothing of it, never heard of it till the day beforeyesterday.' 'And why didn't you come to the police till now?' 'I wasfrightened.' 'And why did you try to hang yourself?' 'From anxiety.''What anxiety?' 'That I should be accused of it.' Well, that's thewhole story. And now what do you suppose they deduced from that?"

　　"Why, there's no supposing. There's a clue, such as it is, a fact.You wouldn't have your painter set free?"

　　"Now they've simply taken him for the murderer. They haven't ashadow of doubt."

　　"That's nonsense. You are excited. But what about the ear-rings? Youmust admit that, if on the very same day and hour ear-rings from theold woman's box have come into Nikolay's hands, they must have comethere somehow. That's a good deal in such a case."

　　"How did they get there? How did they get there?" cried Razumihin."How can you, a doctor, whose duty it is to study man and who has moreopportunity than any one else for studying human nature- how can youfail to see the character of the man in the whole story? Don't you seeat once that the answers he has given in the examination are theholy truth? They came into his hand precisely as he has told us- hestepped on the box and picked it up."

　　"The holy truth! But didn't he own himself that he told a lie atfirst?"

　　"Listen to me, listen attentively. The porter and Koch andPestryakov and the other porter and the wife of the first porter andthe woman who was sitting in the porter's lodge and the man Kryukov,who had just got out of a cab at that minute and went in at theentry with a lady on his arm, that is eight or ten witnesses, agreethat Nikolay had Dmitri on the ground, was lying on him beating him,while Dmitri hung on to his hair, beating him, too. They lay rightacross the way, blocking the thoroughfare. They were sworn at on allsides while they 'like children' (the very words of the witnesses)were falling over one another, squealing, fighting and laughing withthe funniest faces, and, chasing one another like children, they raninto the street. Now take careful note. The bodies upstairs were warm,you understand, warm when they found them! If they, or Nikolayalone, had murdered them and broken open the boxes, or simply takenpart in the robbery, allow me to ask you one question: do theirstate of mind, their squeals and giggles and childish scuffling at thegate fit in with axes, bloodshed, fiendish cunning, robbery? They'djust killed them, not five or ten minutes before, for the bodieswere still warm, and at once, leaving the flat open, knowing thatpeople would go there at once, flinging away their booty, theyrolled about like children, laughing and attracting general attention.And there are a dozen witnesses to swear to that!"

　　"Of course it is strange! It's impossible, indeed, but..."

　　"No, brother, no buts. And if the ear-rings' being found inNikolay's hands at the very day and hour of the murder constitutesan important piece of circumstantial evidence against him- althoughthe explanation given by him accounts for it, and therefore it doesnot tell seriously against him- one must take into consideration thefacts which prove him innocent, especially as they are facts thatcannot be denied. And do you suppose, from the character of ourlegal system, that they will accept, or that they are in a position toaccept, this fact- resting simply on a psychological impossibility- asirrefutable and conclusively breaking down the circumstantial evidencefor the prosecution? No, they won't accept it, they certainly won't,because they found the jewel-case and the man tried to hang himself,'which he could not have done if he hadn't felt guilty.' That's thepoint, that's what excites me, you must understand!"

　　"Oh, I see you are excited! Wait a bit. I forgot to ask you; whatproof is there that the box came from the old woman?"

　　"That's been proved," said Razumihin with apparent reluctance,frowning. "Koch recognised the jewel-case and gave the name of theowner, who proved conclusively that it was his."

　　"That's bad. Now another point. Did any one see Nikolay at thetime that Koch and Pestryakov were going upstairs at first, and isthere no evidence about that?"

　　"Nobody did see him," Razumihin answered with vexation. "That'sthe worst of it. Even Koch and Pestryakov did not notice them on theirway upstairs, though, indeed, their evidence could not have been worthmuch. They said they saw the flat was open, and that there must bework going on in it, but they took no special notice and could notremember whether there actually were men at work in it."

　　"Hm!... So the only evidence for the defence is that they werebeating one another and laughing. That constitutes a strongpresumption, but... How do you explain the facts yourself?"

　　"How do I explain them? What is there to explain? It's clear. At anyrate, the direction in which explanation is to be sought is clear, andthe jewel-case points to it. The real murderer dropped thoseear-rings. The murderer was upstairs, locked in, when Koch andPestryakov knocked at the door. Koch, like an ass, did not stay at thedoor; so the murderer popped out and ran down, too, for he had noother way of escape. He hid from Koch, Pestryakov and the porter inthe flat when Nikolay and Dmitri had just run out of it. He stoppedthere while the porter and others were going upstairs, waited tillthey were out of hearing, and then went calmly downstairs at thevery minute when Dmitri and Nikolay ran out into the street andthere was no one in the entry; possibly he was seen, but notnoticed. There are lots of people going in and out. He must havedropped the ear-rings out of his pocket when he stood behind the door,and did not notice he dropped them, because he had other things tothink of. The jewel-case is a conclusive proof that he did standthere.... That's how I explain it."

　　"Too clever! No, my boy, you're too clever. That beats everything."

　　"But, why, why?"

　　"Why, because everything fits too well... it's too melodramatic."

　　"A-ach!" Razumihin was exclaiming, but at that moment the dooropened and a personage came in who was a stranger to all present.

　　Chapter Five

　　THIS WAS a gentleman no longer young, of a stiff and portlyappearance, and a cautious and sour countenance. He began bystopping short in the doorway, staring about him with offensive andundisguised astonishment, as though asking himself what sort ofplace he had come to. Mistrustfully and with an affectation of beingalarmed and almost affronted, he scanned Raskolnikov's low andnarrow "cabin." With the same amazement he stared at Raskolnikov,who lay undressed, dishevelled, unwashed, on his miserable dirty sofa,looking fixedly at him. Then with the same deliberation he scrutinisedthe uncouth, unkempt figure and unshaven face of Razumihin, who lookedhim boldly and inquiringly in the face without rising from his seat. Aconstrained silence lasted for a couple of minutes, and then, as mightbe expected, some scene-shifting took place. Reflecting, probably fromcertain fairly unmistakable signs, that he would get nothing in this"cabin" by attempting to overawe them, the gentleman softenedsomewhat, and civilly, though with some severity, emphasising everysyllable of his question, addressed Zossimov:

　　"Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, a student, or formerly a student?"

　　Zossimov made a slight movement, and would have answered, had notRazumihin anticipated him.

　　"Here he is lying on the sofa! What do you want?"

　　This familiar "what do you want" seemed to cut the ground from thefeet of the pompous gentleman. He was turning to Razumihin, butchecked himself in time and turned to Zossimov again.

　　"This is Raskolnikov," mumbled Zossimov, nodding towards him. Thenhe gave a prolonged yawn, opening his mouth as wide as possible.Then he lazily put his hand into his waistcoat-pocket, pulled out ahuge gold watch in a round hunter's case, opened it, looked at itand as slowly and lazily proceeded to put it back.

　　Raskolnikov himself lay without speaking, on his back, gazingpersistently, though 'without understanding, at the stranger. Now thathis face was turned away from the strange flower on the paper, itwas extremely pale and wore a look of anguish, as though he had justundergone an agonising operation or just been taken from the rack. Butthe new-comer gradually began to arouse his attention, then hiswonder, then suspicion and even alarm. When Zossimov said "This isRaskolnikov" he jumped up quickly, sat on the sofa and with analmost defiant, but weak and breaking, voice articulated:

　　"Yes, I am Raskolnikov! What do you want?"

　　The visitor scrutinised him and pronounced impressively:

　　"Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin. I believe I have reason to hope that myname is not wholly unknown to you?"

　　But Raskolnikov, who had expected something quite different, gazedblankly and dreamily at him, making no reply, as though he heard thename of Pyotr Petrovitch for the first time.

　　"Is it possible that you can up to the present have received noinformation?" asked Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhat disconcerted.

　　In reply Raskolnikov sank languidly back on the pillow, put hishands behind his head and gazed at the ceiling. A look of dismaycame into Luzhin's face. Zossimov and Razumihin stared at him moreinquisitively than ever, and at last he showed unmistakable signs ofembarrassment.

　　"I had presumed and calculated," he faltered, "that a letterposted more than ten days, if not a fortnight ago..."

　　"I say, why are you standing in the doorway?" Razumihininterrupted suddenly. "If you've something to say, sit down.Nastasya and you are so crowded. Nastasya, make room. Here's achair, thread your way in!"

　　He moved his chair back from the table, made a little spacebetween the table and his knees, and waited in a rather crampedposition for the visitor to "thread his way in." The minute was sochosen that it was impossible to refuse, and the visitor squeezedhis way through, hurrying and stumbling. Reaching the chair, he satdown, looking suspiciously at Razumihin.

　　"No need to be nervous," the latter blurted out. "Rodya has been illfor the last five days and delirious for three, but now he isrecovering and has got an appetite. This is his doctor, who has justhad a look at him. I am a comrade of Rodya's, like him, formerly astudent, and now I am nursing him; so don't you take any notice of us,but go on with your business."

　　"Thank you. But shall I not disturb the invalid by my presence andconversation?" Pyotr Petrovitch asked of Zossimov.

　　"N-no," mumbled Zossimov; "you may amuse him." He yawned again.

　　"He has been conscious a long time, since the morning," went onRazumihin, whose familiarity seemed so much like unaffectedgood-nature that Pyotr Petrovitch began to be more cheerful, partly,perhaps, because this shabby and impudent person had introducedhimself as a student.

　　"Your mamma," began Luzhin.

　　"Hm!" Razumihin cleared his throat loudly. Luzhin looked at himinquiringly.

　　"That's all right, go on."

　　Luzhin shrugged his shoulders.

　　"Your mamma had commenced a letter to you while I was sojourningin her neighbourhood. On my arrival here I purposely allowed a fewdays to elapse before coming to see you, in order that I might befully assured that you were in full possession of the tidings; butnow, to my astonishment..."

　　"I know, I know!" Raskolnikov cried suddenly with impatientvexation. "So you are the fiance? I know, and that's enough!"

　　There was no doubt about Pyotr Petrovitch's being offended thistime, but he said nothing. He made a violent effort to understand whatit all meant. There was a moment's silence.

　　Meanwhile Raskolnikov, who had turned a little towards him when heanswered, began suddenly staring at him again with marked curiosity,as though he had not had a good look at him yet, or as thoughsomething new had struck him; he rose from his pillow on purpose tostare at him. There certainly was something peculiar in PyotrPetrovitch's whole appearance, something which seemed to justify thetitle of "fiance" so unceremoniously applied to him. In the firstplace, it was evident, far too much so indeed, that Pyotr Petrovitchhad made eager use of his few days in the capital to get himself upand rig himself out in expectation of his betrothed- a perfectlyinnocent and permissible proceeding, indeed. Even his own, perhaps toocomplacent, consciousness of the agreeable improvement in hisappearance might have been forgiven in such circumstances, seeing thatPyotr Petrovitch had taken up the role of fiance. All his clothes werefresh from the tailor's and were all right, except for being too newand too distinctly appropriate. Even the stylish new round hat had thesame significance. Pyotr Petrovitch treated it too respectfully andheld it too carefully in his hands. The exquisite pair of lavendergloves, real Louvain, told the same tale, if only from the fact of hisnot wearing them, but carrying them in his hand for show. Light andyouthful colours predominated in Pyotr Petrovitch's attire. He worea charming summer jacket of a fawn shade, light thin trousers, awaistcoat of the same, new and fine linen, a cravat of the lightestcambric with pink stripes on it, and the best of it was, this allsuited Pyotr Petrovitch. His very fresh and even handsome facelooked younger than his forty-five years at all times. His dark,mutton-chop whiskers made an agreeable setting on both sides,growing thickly about his shining, clean-shaven chin. Even his hair,touched here and there with grey, though it had been combed and curledat a hairdresser's, did not give him a stupid appearance, as curledhair usually does, by inevitably suggesting a German on hiswedding-day. If there really was something unpleasing and repulsive inhis rather good-looking and imposing countenance, it was due toquite other causes. After scanning Mr. Luzhin unceremoniously,Raskolnikov smiled malignantly, sank back on the pillow and staredat the ceiling as before.

　　But Mr. Luzhin hardened his heart and seemed to determine to take nonotice of their oddities.

　　"I feel the greatest regret at finding you in this situation," hebegan, again breaking the silence with an effort. "If I had been awareof your illness I should have come earlier. But you know what businessis. I have, too, a very important legal affair in the Senate, not tomention other preoccupations which you may well conjecture. I amexpecting your mamma and sister any minute."

　　Raskolnikov made a movement and seemed about to speak; his faceshowed some excitement. Pyotr Petrovitch paused, waited, but asnothing followed, he went on:

　　"...Any minute. I have found a lodging for them on their arrival."

　　"Where?" asked Raskolnikov weakly.

　　"Very near here, in Bakaleyev's house."

　　"That's in Voskresensky," put in Razumihin. "There are two storeysof rooms, let by a merchant called Yushin; I've been there."

　　"Yes, rooms..."

　　"A disgusting place- filthy, stinking and, what's more, ofdoubtful character. Things have happened there, and there are allsorts of queer people living there. And I went there about ascandalous business. It's cheap, though..."

　　"I could not, of course, find out so much about it, for I am astranger in Petersburg myself," Pyotr Petrovitch replied huffily."However, the two rooms are exceedingly clean, and as it is for soshort a time... I have already taken a permanent, that is, ourfuture flat," he said, addressing Raskolnikov, "and I am having itdone up. And meanwhile I am myself cramped for room in a lodgingwith my friend Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, in the flat ofMadame Lippevechsel; it was he who told me of Bakaleyev's house,too...."

　　"Lebeziatnikov?" said Raskolnikov slowly, as if recalling something.

　　"Yes, Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, a clerk in the Ministry. Doyou know him?"

　　"Yes... no," Raskolnikov answered.

　　"Excuse me, I fancied so from your inquiry. I was once hisguardian.... A very nice young man and advanced. I like to meetyoung people: one learns new things from them." Luzhin looked roundhopefully at them all.

　　"How do you mean?" asked Razumihin.

　　"In the most serious and essential matters," Pyotr Petrovitchreplied, as though delighted at the question. "You see, it's ten yearssince I visited Petersburg. All the novelties, reforms, ideas havereached us in the provinces, but to see it all more clearly one mustbe in Petersburg. And it's my notion that you observe and learn mostby watching the younger generation. And I confess I am delighted..."

　　"At what?"

　　"Your question is a wide one. I may be mistaken, but I fancy Ifind clearer views, more, so to say, criticism, more practicality..."

　　"That's true," Zossimov let drop.

　　"Nonsense! There's no practicality." Razumihin flew at him."Practicality is a difficult thing to find; it does not drop down fromheaven. And for the last two hundred years we have been divorcedfrom all practical life. Ideas, if you like, are fermenting," hesaid to Pyotr Petrovitch, "and desire for good exists, though it'sin a childish form, and honesty you may find, although there arecrowds of brigands. Anyway, there's no practicality. Practicality goeswell shod."

　　"I don't agree with you," Pyotr Petrovitch replied, with evidentenjoyment. "Of course, people do get carried away and make mistakes,but one must have indulgence; those mistakes are merely evidence ofenthusiasm for the cause and of abnormal external environment. Iflittle has been done, the time has been but short; of means I will notspeak. It's my personal view, if you care to know, that somethinghas been accomplished already. New valuable ideas, new valuableworks are circulating in the place of our old dreamy and romanticauthors. Literature is taking a maturer form, many injurious prejudicehave been rooted up and turned into ridicule.... In a word, we havecut ourselves off irrevocably from the past, and that, to my thinking,is a great thing..."

　　"He's learnt it by heart to show off Raskolnikov pronouncedsuddenly.

　　"What?" asked Pyotr Petrovitch, not catching his words; but hereceived no reply.

　　"That's all true," Zossimov hastened to interpose.

　　"Isn't it so?" Pyotr Petrovitch went on, glancing affably atZossimov. "You must admit," he went on, addressing Razumihin with ashade of triumph and superciliousness- he almost added "young man"-"that there is an advance, or, as they say now, progress in the nameof science and economic truth..."

　　"A commonplace."

　　"No, not a commonplace! Hitherto, for instance, if I were told,'love thy neighbour,' what came of it?" Pyotr Petrovitch went on,perhaps with excessive haste. "It came to my tearing my coat in halfto share with my neighbour and we both were left half naked. As aRussian proverb has it, 'catch several hares and you won't catch one.'Science now tells us, love yourself before all men, for everythingin the world rests on self-interest. You love yourself and manage yourown affairs properly and your coat remains whole. Economic truthadds that the better private affairs are organised in society- themore whole coats, so to say- the firmer are its foundations and thebetter is the common welfare organised too. Therefore, in acquiringwealth solely and exclusively for myself, I am acquiring so tospeak, for all, and helping to bring to pass my neighbour's gettinga little more than a torn coat; and that not from private, personalliberality, but as a consequence of the general advance. The idea issimple, but unhappily it has been a long time reaching us, beinghindered by idealism and sentimentality. And yet it would seem to wantvery little wit to perceive it..."

　　"Excuse me, I've very little wit myself," Razumihin cut insharply, "and so let us drop it. I began this discussion with anobject, but I've grown so sick during the last three years of thischattering to amuse oneself, of this incessant flow of commonplaces,always the same, that, by Jove, I blush even when other people talklike that. You are in a hurry, no doubt, to exhibit your acquirements;and I don't blame you, that's quite pardonable. I only wanted tofind out what sort of man you are, for so many unscrupulous peoplehave got hold of the progressive cause of late and have so distortedin their own interests everything they touched, that the whole causehas been dragged in the mire. That's enough!"

　　"Excuse me, sir," said Luzhin, affronted, and speaking withexcessive dignity. "Do you mean to suggest so unceremoniously that Itoo..."

　　"Oh, my dear sir... how could I?... Come, that's enough,"Razumihin concluded, and he turned abruptly to Zossimov to continuetheir previous conversation.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch had the good sense to accept the disavowal. He madeup his mind to take leave in another minute or two.

　　"I trust our acquaintance," he said, addressing Raskolnikov, "may,upon your recovery and in view of the circumstances of which you areaware, become closer.... Above all, I hope for your return tohealth..."

　　Raskolnikov did not even turn his head. Pyotr Petrovitch begangetting up from his chair.

　　"One of her customers must have killed her," Zossimov declaredpositively.

　　"Not a doubt of it," replied Razumihin. "Porfiry doesn't give hisopinion, but is examining all who have left pledges with her there."

　　"Examining them?" Raskolnikov asked aloud.

　　"Yes. What then?"

　　"Nothing."

　　"How does he get hold of them?" asked Zossimov.

　　"Koch has given the names of some of them, other names are on thewrappers of the pledges and some have come forward of themselves."

　　"It must have been a cunning and practised ruffian! The boldnessof it! The coolness!"

　　"That's just what it wasn't!" interposed Razumihin. "That's whatthrows you all off the scent. But I maintain that he is not cunning,nor practised, and probably this was his first crime! Thesupposition that it was a calculated crime and a cunning criminaldoesn't work. Suppose him to have been inexperienced, and it's clearthat it was only a chance that saved him- and chance may doanything. Why, he did not foresee obstacles, perhaps! And how did heset to work? He took jewels worth ten or twenty roubles, stuffinghis pockets with them, ransacked the old woman's trunk, her rags-and they found fifteen hundred roubles, besides notes, in a box in thetop drawer of the chest! He did not know how to rob; he could onlymurder. It was his first crime, I assure you, his first crime; he losthis head. And he got off more by luck than good counsel!"

　　"You are talking of the murder of the old pawnbroker, I believe?"Pyotr Petrovitch put in, addressing Zossimov. He was standing, hat andgloves in hand, but before departing he felt disposed to throw off afew more intellectual phrases. He was evidently anxious to make afavourable impression and his vanity overcame his prudence.

　　"Yes. You've heard of it?"

　　"Oh, yes, being in the neighbourhood."

　　"Do you know the details?"

　　"I can't say that; but another circumstance interests me in thecase- the whole question, so to say. Not to speak of the fact thatcrime has been greatly on the increase among the lower classesduring the last five years, not to speak of the cases of robbery andarson everywhere, what strikes me as the strangest thing is that inthe higher classes, too, crime is increasing proportionately. In oneplace one hears of a student's robbing the mail on the high road; inanother place people of good social position forge false banknotes; inMoscow of late a whole gang has been captured who used to forgelottery tickets, and one of the ringleaders was a lecturer inuniversal history; then our secretary abroad was murdered from someobscure motive of gain.... And if this old woman, the pawnbroker,has been murdered by some one of a higher class in society- forpeasants don't pawn gold trinkets- how are we to explain thisdemoralisation of the civilised part of our society?"

　　"There are many economic changes," put in Zossimov.

　　"How are we to explain it?" Razumihin caught him up. "It might beexplained by our inveterate unpracticality."

　　"How do you mean?"

　　"What answer had your lecturer in Moscow to make to the question whyhe was forging notes? 'Everybody is getting rich one way or another,so I want to make haste to get rich too.' I don't remember the exactwords, but the upshot was that he wants money for nothing, withoutwaiting or working! We've grown used to having everythingready-made, to walking on crutches, to having our food chewed forus. Then the great hour struck,* and every man showed himself in histrue colours."-

　　* The emancipation of the serfs in 1861 is meant.- TRANSLATOR'SNOTE.-

　　"But morality? And so to speak, principles..."

　　"But why do you worry about it?" Raskolnikov interposed suddenly."It's in accordance with your theory!"

　　"In accordance with my theory?"

　　"Why, carry out logically the theory you were advocating just now,and it follows that people may be killed..."

　　"Upon my word!" cried Luzhin.

　　"No, that's not so," put in Zossimov.

　　Raskolnikov lay with a white face and twitching upper lip, breathingpainfully.

　　"There's a measure in all things," Luzhin went on superciliously."Economic ideas are not an incitement to murder, and one has but tosuppose..."

　　"And is it true," Raskolnikov interposed once more suddenly, againin a voice quivering with fury and delight in insulting him, "is ittrue that you told your fiancee... within an hour of her acceptance,that what pleased you most... was that she was a beggar... becauseit was better to raise a wife from poverty, so that you may havecomplete control over her, and reproach her with your being herbenefactor?"

　　"Upon my word," Luzhin cried wrathfully and irritably, crimsonwith confusion, "to distort my words in this way! Excuse me, allowme to assure you that the report which has reached you, or ratherlet me say, has been conveyed to you, has no foundation in truth,and I... suspect who... in a word... this arrow... in a word, yourmamma... She seemed to me in other things, with all her excellentqualities, of a somewhat highflown and romantic way of thinking....But I was a thousand miles from supposing that she would misunderstandand misrepresent things in so fanciful a way.... And indeed...indeed..."

　　"I tell you what," cried Raskolnikov, raising himself on hispillow and fixing his piercing, glittering eyes upon him, "I tellyou what."

　　"What?" Luzhin stood still, waiting with a defiant and offendedface. Silence lasted for some seconds.

　　"Why, if ever again... you dare to mention a single word... about mymother... I shall send you flying downstairs!"

　　"What's the matter with you?" cried Razumihin.

　　"So that's how it is?" Luzhin turned pale and bit his lip. "Let metell you, sir," he began deliberately, doing his utmost to restrainhimself but breathing hard, "at the first moment I saw you you wereill-disposed to me, but I remained here on purpose to find out more. Icould forgive a great deal in a sick man and a connection, butyou... never after this..."

　　"I am not ill," cried Raskolnikov.

　　"So much the worse..."

　　"Go to hell!"

　　But Luzhin was already leaving without finishing his speech,squeezing between the table and the chair; Razumihin got up thistime to let him pass. Without glancing at any one, and not evennodding to Zossimov, who had for some time been making signs to him tolet the sick man alone, he went out, lifting his hat to the level ofhis shoulders to avoid crushing it as he stooped to go out of thedoor. And even the curve of his spine was expressive of the horribleinsult he had received.

　　"How could you- how could you!" Razumihin said, shaking his headin perplexity.

　　"Let me alone- let me alone all of you!" Raskolnikov cried in afrenzy. "Will you ever leave off tormenting me? I am not afraid ofyou! I am not afraid of any one, any one now! Get away from me! I wantto be alone, alone, alone!"

　　"Come along," said Zossimov, nodding to Razumihin.

　　"But we can't leave him like this!"

　　"Come along," Zossimov repeated insistently, and he went out.Razumihin thought a minute and ran to overtake him.

　　"It might be worse not to obey him," said Zossimov on the stairs."He mustn't be irritated."

　　"What's the matter with him?"

　　"If only he could get some favourable shock, that's what would doit! At first he was better.... You know he has got something on hismind! Some fixed idea weighing on him.... I am very much afraid so; hemust have!"

　　"Perhaps it's that gentleman, Pyotr Petrovitch. From hisconversation I gather he is going to marry his sister, and that he hadreceived a letter about it just before his illness...."

　　"Yes, confound the man! he may have upset the case altogether. Buthave you noticed, he takes no interest in anything, he does notrespond to anything except one point on which he seems excited- that'sthe murder?"

　　"Yes, yes," Razumihin agreed, "I noticed that, too. He isinterested, frightened. It gave him a shock on the day he was ill inthe police office; he fainted."

　　"Tell me more about that this evening and I'll tell you somethingafterwards. He interests me very much! In half an hour I'll go and seehim again.... There'll be no inflammation though."

　　"Thanks! And I'll wait with Pashenka meantime and will keep watch onhim through Nastasya...."

　　Raskolnikov, left alone, looked with impatience and misery atNastasya, but she still lingered.

　　"Won't you have some tea now?" she asked.

　　"Later! I am sleepy! Leave me."

　　He turned abruptly to the wall; Nastasya went out.

　　Chapter Six

　　BUT AS SOON as she went out, he got up, latched the door, undidthe parcel which Razumihin had brought in that evening and had tied upagain and began dressing. Strange to say, he seemed immediately tohave become perfectly calm; not a trace of his recent delirium norof the panic fear that had haunted him of late. It was the firstmoment of a strange sudden calm. His movements were precise anddefinite; a firm purpose was evident in them. "To-day, to-day," hemuttered to himself. He understood that he was still weak, but hisintense spiritual concentration gave him strength and self-confidence.He hoped, moreover, that he would not fall down in the street. When hehad dressed in entirely new clothes, he looked at the money lying onthe table, and after a moment's thought put it in his pocket. It wastwenty-five roubles. He took also all the copper change from the tenroubles spent by Razumihin on the clothes. Then he softly unlatchedthe door, went out, slipped downstairs and glanced in at the openkitchen door. Nastasya was standing with her back to him, blowing upthe landlady's samovar. She heard nothing. Who would have dreamed ofhis going out, indeed? A minute later he was in the street.

　　It was nearly eight o'clock, the sun was setting. It was as stiflingas before, but he eagerly drank in the stinking, dusty town air. Hishead felt rather dizzy; a sort of savage energy gleamed suddenly inhis feverish eyes and his wasted, pale and yellow face. He did notknow and did not think where he was going, he had one thought only"that all this must be ended to-day, once for all, immediately; thathe would not return home without it, because he would not go on livinglike that." How, with what to make an end? He had not an idea aboutit, he did not even want to think of it. He drove away thought;thought tortured him. All he knew, all he felt was that everythingmust be changed "one way or another," he repeated with desperate andimmovable self-confidence and determination.

　　From old habit he took his usual walk in the direction of the HayMarket. A dark-haired young man with a barrel organ was standing inthe road in front of a little general shop and was grinding out a verysentimental song. He was accompanying a girl of fifteen, who stoodon the pavement in front of him. She was dressed up in a crinoline,a mantle and a straw hat with a flame-coloured feather in it, all veryold and shabby. In a strong and rather agreeable voice, cracked andcoarsened by street singing, she sang in hope of getting a copper fromthe shop. Raskolnikov joined two or three listeners, took out a fivecopeck piece and put it in the girl's hand. She broke off abruptlyon a sentimental high note, shouted sharply to the organ grinder "Comeon," and both moved on to the next shop.

　　"Do you like street music?" said Raskolnikov, addressing amiddle-aged man standing idly by him. The man looked at him,startled and wondering.

　　"I love to hear singing to a street organ," said Raskolnikov, andhis manner seemed strangely out of keeping with the subject- "I likeit on cold, dark, damp autumn evenings- they must be damp- when allthe passers-by have pale green, sickly faces, or better still when wetsnow is falling straight down, when there's no wind- you know what Imean? and the street lamps shine through it..."

　　"I don't know.... Excuse me..." muttered the stranger, frightened bythe question and Raskolnikov's strange manner, and he crossed overto the other side of the street.

　　Raskolnikov walked straight on and came out at the corner of the HayMarket, where the huckster and his wife had talked with Lizaveta;but they were not there now. Recognising the place, he stopped, lookedround and addressed a young fellow in a red shirt who stood gapingbefore a corn chandler's shop.

　　"Isn't there a man who keeps a booth with his wife at this corner?"

　　"All sorts of people keep booths here," answered the young man,glancing superciliously at Raskolnikov.

　　"What's his name?"

　　"What he was christened."

　　"Aren't you a Zaraisky man, too? Which province?"

　　The young man looked at Raskolnikov again.

　　"It's not a province, your excellency, but a district. Graciouslyforgive me, your excellency!"

　　"Is that a tavern at the top there?"

　　"Yes, it's an eating-house and there's a billiard-room and you'llfind princesses there too.... La-la!"

　　Raskolnikov crossed the square. In that corner there was a densecrowd of peasants. He pushed his way into the thickest part of it,looking at the faces. He felt an unaccountable inclination to enterinto conversation with people. But the peasants took no notice of him;they were all shouting in groups together. He stood and thought alittle and took a turning to the right in the direction of V.

　　He had often crossed that little street which turns at an angle,leading from the market-place to Sadovy Street. Of late he had oftenfelt drawn to wander about this district, when he felt depressed, thathe might feel more so.

　　Now he walked along, thinking of nothing. At that point there is agreat block of buildings, entirely let out in dram shops andeating-houses; women were continually running in and out,bare-headed and in their indoor clothes. Here and there theygathered in groups, on the pavement, especially about the entrances tovarious festive establishments in the lower storeys. From one of thesea loud din, sounds of singing, the tinkling of a guitar and shoutsof merriment, floated into the street. A crowd of women were thronginground the door; some were sitting on the steps, others on thepavement, others were standing talking. A drunken soldier, smoking acigarette, was walking near them in the road, swearing; he seemed tobe trying to find his way somewhere, but had forgotten where. Onebeggar was quarrelling with another, and a man dead drunk was lyingright across the road. Raskolnikov joined the throng of women, whowere talking in husky voices. They were bare-headed and wore cottondresses and goatskin shoes. There were women of forty and some notmore than seventeen; almost all had blackened eyes.

　　He felt strangely attracted by the singing and all the noise anduproar in the saloon below.... Some one could be heard withindancing frantically, marking time with his heels to the sounds ofthe guitar and of a thin falsetto voice singing a jaunty air. Helistened intently, gloomily and dreamily, bending down at the entranceand peeping inquisitively in from the pavement.-

　　"Oh, my handsome soldier

　　Don't beat me for nothing,"-

　　trilled the thin voice of the singer. Raskolnikov felt a greatdesire to make out what he was singing, as though everythingdepended on that.

　　"Shall I go in?" he thought. "They are laughing. From drink. Shall Iget drunk?"

　　"Won't you come in?" one of the women asked him. Her voice was stillmusical and less thick than the others, she was young and notrepulsive- the only one of the group.

　　"Why, she's pretty," he said, drawing himself up and looking at her.

　　She smiled, much pleased at the compliment.

　　"You're very nice looking yourself," she said.

　　"Isn't he thin though!" observed another woman in a deep bass. "Haveyou just come out of a hospital?"

　　"They're all generals' daughters, it seems, but they have all snubnoses," interposed a tipsy peasant with a sly smile on his face,wearing a loose coat. "See how jolly they are."

　　"Go along with you!"

　　"I'll go, sweetie!"

　　And he darted down into the saloon below. Raskolnikov moved on.

　　"I say, sir," the girl shouted after him.

　　"What is it?"

　　She hesitated.

　　"I'll always be pleased to spend an hour with you, kind gentleman,but now I feel shy. Give me six copecks for a drink, there's a niceyoung man!"

　　Raskolnikov gave her what came first- fifteen copecks.

　　"Ah, what a good-natured gentleman!"

　　"What's your name?"

　　"Ask for Duclida."

　　"Well, that's too much," one of the women observed, shaking her headat Duclida. "I don't know how you can ask like that. I believe Ishould drop with shame...."

　　Raskolnikov looked curiously at the speaker. She was a pock-markedwench of thirty, covered with bruises, with her upper lip swollen. Shemade her criticism quietly and earnestly. "Where is it," thoughtRaskolnikov. "Where is it I've read that some one condemned to deathsays or thinks, an hour before his death, that if he had to live onsome high rock, on such a narrow ledge that he'd only room to stand,and the ocean, everlasting darkness, everlasting solitude, everlastingtempest around him, if he had to remain standing on a square yard ofspace all his life, a thousand years, eternity, it were better to liveso than to die at once! Only to live, to live and live! Life, whateverit may be!... How true it is! Good God, how true! Man is a vilecreature!... And vile is he who calls him vile for that," he added amoment later.

　　He went into another street. "Bah, the Palais de Crystal!Razumihin was just talking of the Palais de Crystal. But what on earthwas it I wanted? Yes, the newspapers.... Zossimov said he'd read it inthe papers. Have you the papers?" he asked, going into a very spaciousand positively clean restaurant, consisting of several rooms, whichwere however rather empty. Two or three people were drinking tea,and in a room further away were sitting four men drinking champagne.Raskolnikov fancied that Zametov was one of them, but he could notbe sure at that distance. "What if it is!" he thought.

　　"Will you have vodka?" asked the waiter.

　　"Give me some tea and bring me the papers, the old ones for the lastfive days and I'll give you something."

　　"Yes, sir, here's to-day's. No vodka?"

　　The old newspapers and the tea were brought. Raskolnikov sat downand began to look through them.

　　"Oh, damn... these are the items of intelligence. An accident on astaircase, spontaneous combustion of a shopkeeper from alcohol, a firein Peski... a fire in the Petersburg quarter... another fire in thePetersburg quarter... and another fire in the Petersburg quarter...Ah, here it is!" He found at last what he was seeking and began toread it. The lines danced before his eyes, but he read it all andbegan eagerly seeking later additions in the following numbers. Hishands shook with nervous impatience as he turned the sheets.Suddenly some one sat down beside him at his table. He looked up, itwas the head clerk Zametov, looking just the same, with the rings onhis fingers and the watch-chain, with the curly, black hair, partedand pomaded, with the smart waistcoat, rather shabby coat and doubtfullinen. He was in a good humour, at least he was smiling very gaily andgood-humouredly. His dark face was rather flushed from the champagnehe had drunk.

　　"What, you here?" he began in surprise, speaking as though he'dknown him all his life. "Why, Razumihin told me only yesterday youwere unconscious. How strange! And do you know I've been to see you?"

　　Raskolnikov knew he would come up to him. He laid aside the papersand turned to Zametov. There was a smile on his lips, and a newshade of irritable impatience was apparent in that smile.

　　"I know you have," he answered. "I've heard it. You looked for mysock.... And you know Razumihin has lost his heart to you? He saysyou've been with him to Luise Ivanovna's, you know the woman you triedto befriend, for whom you winked to the Explosive Lieutenant and hewould not understand. Do you remember? How could he fail tounderstand- it was quite clear, wasn't it?"

　　"What a hot head he is!"

　　"The explosive one?"

　　"No, your friend Razumihin."

　　"You must have a jolly life, Mr. Zametov; entrance free to themost agreeable places. Who's been pouring champagne into you justnow?"

　　"We've just been... having a drink together.... You talk aboutpouring it into me!"

　　"By way of a fee! You profit by everything!" Raskolnikov laughed,"it's all right, my dear boy," he added, slapping Zametov on theshoulder. "I am not speaking from temper, but in a friendly way, forsport, as that workman of yours said when he was scuffling withDmitri, in the case of the old woman...."

　　"How do you know about it?"

　　"Perhaps I know more about it than you do."

　　"How strange you are.... I am sure you are still very unwell. Yououghtn't to have come out."

　　"Oh, do I seem strange to you?"

　　"Yes. What are you doing, reading the papers?"

　　"Yes."

　　"There's a lot about the fires."

　　"No, I am not reading about the fires." Here he lookedmysteriously at Zametov; his lips were twisted again in a mockingsmile. "No, I am not reading about the fires," he went on, winkingat Zametov. "But confess now, my dear fellow, you're awfully anxiousto know what I am reading about?"

　　"I am not in the least. Mayn't I ask a question? Why do you keepon... ?"

　　"Listen, you are a man of culture and education?"

　　"I was in the sixth class at the gymnasium," said Zametov withsome dignity.

　　"Sixth class! Ah, my cocksparrow! With your parting and yourrings- you are a gentleman of fortune. Foo, what a charming boy!" HereRaskolnikov broke into a nervous laugh right in Zametov's face. Thelatter drew back, more amazed than offended.

　　"Foo, how strange you are!" Zametov repeated very seriously. "Ican't help thinking you are still delirious."

　　"I am delirious? You are fibbing, my cocksparrow! So I am strange?You find me curious, do you?"

　　"Yes, curious."

　　"Shall I tell you what I was reading about, what I was lookingfor? See what a lot of papers I've made them bring me. Suspicious,eh?"

　　"Well, what is it?"

　　"You prick up your ears?"

　　"How do you mean- prick up my ears?"

　　"I'll explain that afterwards, but now, my boy, I declare toyou... no, better 'I confess'... No, that's not right either; 'Imake a deposition and you take it.' I depose that I was reading,that I was looking and searching...." he screwed up his eyes andpaused. "I was searching- and came here on purpose to do it- fornews of the murder of the old pawnbroker woman," he articulated atlast, almost in a whisper, bringing his face exceedingly close tothe face of Zametov. Zametov looked at him steadily, without moving ordrawing his face away. What struck Zametov afterwards as the strangestpart of it all was that silence followed for exactly a minute, andthat they gazed at one another all the while.

　　"What if you have been reading about it?" he cried at last,perplexed and impatient. "That's no business of mine! What of it?"

　　"The same old woman," Raskolnikov went on in the same whisper, notheeding Zametov's explanation, "about whom you were talking in thepolice office, you remember, when I fainted. Well, do you understandnow?"

　　"What do you mean? Understand... what?" Zametov brought out,almost alarmed.

　　Raskolnikov's set and earnest face was suddenly transformed, andhe suddenly went off into the same nervous laugh as before, asthough utterly unable to restrain himself. And in one flash herecalled with extraordinary vividness of sensation a moment in therecent past, that moment when he stood with the axe behind the door,while the latch trembled and the men outside swore and shook it, andhe had a sudden desire to shout at them, to swear at them, to putout his tongue at them, to mock them, to laugh, and laugh, and laugh!

　　"You are either mad, or..." began Zametov, and he broke off, asthough stunned by the idea that had suddenly flashed into his mind.

　　"Or? Or what? What? Come, tell me!"

　　"Nothing," said Zametov, getting angry, "it's all nonsense!"

　　Both were silent. After his sudden fit of laughter Raskolnikovbecame suddenly thoughtful and melancholy. He put his elbow on thetable and leaned his head on his hand. He seemed to have completelyforgotten Zametov. The silence lasted for some time.

　　"Why don't you drink your tea? It's getting cold," said Zametov.

　　"What! Tea? Oh, yes..." Raskolnikov sipped the glass, put a morselof bread in his mouth and, suddenly looking at Zametov, seemed toremember everything and pulled himself together. At the same momenthis face resumed its original mocking expression. He went ondrinking tea.

　　"There have been a great many of these crimes lately," said Zametov."Only the other day I read in the Moscow News that a whole gang offalse coiners had been caught in Moscow. It was a regular society.They used to forge tickets!"

　　"Oh, but it was a long time ago! I read about it a month ago,"Raskolnikov answered calmly. "So you consider them criminals?" headded smiling.

　　"Of course they are criminals."

　　"They? They are children, simpletons, not criminals! Why, half ahundred people meeting for such an object- what an idea! Three wouldbe too many, and then they want to have more faith in one other thanin themselves! One has only to blab in his cups and it allcollapses. Simpletons! They engaged untrustworthy people to change thenotes- what a thing to trust to a casual stranger! Well, let ussuppose that these simpletons succeed and each makes a million, andwhat follows for the rest of their lives? Each is dependent on theothers for the rest of his life! Better hang oneself at once! And theydid not know how to change the notes either; the man who changed thenotes took five thousand roubles, and his hands trembled. He countedthe first four thousand, but did not count the fifth thousand- hewas in such a hurry to get the money into his pocket and run away.Of course he roused suspicion. And the whole thing came to a crashthrough one fool! Is it possible?"

　　"That his hands trembled?" observed Zametov, "yes, that's quitepossible. That I feel quite sure is possible. Sometimes one can'tstand things."

　　"Can't stand that?"

　　"Why, could you stand it then? No, I couldn't. For the sake of ahundred roubles to face such a terrible experience! To go with falsenotes into a bank where it's their business to spot that sort ofthing! No, I should not have the face to do it. Would you?"

　　Raskolnikov had an intense desire again "to put his tongue out."Shivers kept running down his spine.

　　"I should do it quite differently," Raskolnikov began. "This ishow I would change the notes: I'd count the first thousand three orfour times backwards and forwards, look at every note and then I'd setto the second thousand; I'd count that half way through and thenhold some fifty rouble note to the light, then turn it, then hold itto the light again- to see whether it was a good one? 'I am afraid,' Iwould say. 'A relation of mine lost twenty-five roubles the otherday through a false note,' and then I'd tell them the whole story. Andafter I began counting the third, 'no, excuse me,' I would say, 'Ifancy I made a mistake in the seventh hundred in that second thousand,I am not sure.' And so I would give up the third thousand and goback to the second and so on to the end. And when I had finished,I'd pick out one from the fifth and one from the second thousand andtake them again to the light and ask again 'change them, please,'and put the clerk into such a stew that he would not know how to getrid of me. When I'd finished and had gone out, I'd come back, 'No,excuse me,' and ask for some explanation. That's how I'd do it."

　　"Foo, what terrible things you say!" said Zametov, laughing. "Butall that is only talk. I dare say when it came to deeds you'd make aslip. I believe that even a practised, desperate man cannot alwaysreckon on himself, much less you and I. To take an example nearhome- that old woman murdered in our district. The murderer seems tohave been a desperate fellow, he risked everything in open daylight,was saved by a miracle- but his hands shook, too. He did not succeedin robbing the place, he' couldn't stand it. That was clear fromthe..."

　　Raskolnikov seemed offended.

　　"Clear? Why don't you catch him then?" he cried, maliciouslygibing at Zametov.

　　"Well, they will catch him."

　　"Who? You? Do you suppose you could catch him? You've a tough job! Agreat point for you is whether a man is spending money or not. If hehad no money and suddenly begins spending, he must be the man. So thatany child can mislead you."

　　"The fact is they always do that, though," answered Zametov. "Aman will commit a clever murder at the risk of his life and then atonce he goes drinking in a tavern. They are caught spending money,they are not all as cunning as you are. You wouldn't go to a tavern,of course?"

　　Raskolnikov frowned and looked steadily at Zametov.

　　"You seem to enjoy the subject and would like to know how I shouldbehave in that case, too?" he asked with displeasure.

　　"I should like to," Zametov answered firmly and seriously.Somewhat too much earnestness began to appear in his words and looks.

　　"Very much?"

　　"Very much!"

　　"All right then. This is how I should behave," Raskolnikov began,again bringing his face close to Zametov's, again staring at him andspeaking in a whisper, so that the latter positively shuddered."This is what I should have done. I should have taken the money andjewels, I should have walked out of there and have gone straight tosome deserted place with fences round it and scarcely any one to beseen, some kitchen garden or place of that sort. I should havelooked out beforehand some stone weighing a hundredweight or morewhich had been lying in the corner from the time the house wasbuilt. I would lift that stone- there would be sure to be a hollowunder it, and I would put the jewels and money in that hole. ThenI'd roll the stone back so that it would look as before, would pressit down with my foot and walk away. And for a year or two, threemaybe, I would not touch it. And, well, they could search! There'dbe no trace."

　　"You are a madman," said Zametov, and for some reason he too spokein a whisper, and moved away from Raskolnikov, whose eyes wereglittering. He had turned fearfully pale and his upper lip wastwitching and quivering. He bent down as close as possible to Zametov,and his lips began to move without uttering a word. This lasted forhalf a minute; he knew what he was doing, but could not restrainhimself. The terrible word trembled on his lips, like the latch onthat door; in another moment it will break out, in another moment hewill let it go, he will speak out.

　　"And what if it was I who murdered the old woman and Lizaveta?" hesaid suddenly and- realised what he had done.

　　Zametov looked wildly at him and turned white as the tablecloth. Hisface wore a contorted smile.

　　"But is it possible?" he brought out faintly. Raskolnikov lookedwrathfully at him.

　　"Own up that you believed it, yes, you did?"

　　"Not a bit of it, I believe it less than ever now," Zametov criedhastily.

　　"I've caught my cocksparrow! So you did believe it before, if nowyou believe less than ever?"

　　"Not at all," cried Zametov, obviously embarrassed. "Have you beenfrightening me so as to lead up to this?"

　　"You don't believe it then? What were you talking about behind myback when I went out of the police office? And why did the ExplosiveLieutenant question me after I fainted? Hey, there," he shouted to thewaiter, getting up and taking his cap, "how much?"

　　"Thirty copecks," the latter replied, running up.

　　"And there is twenty copecks for vodka. See what a lot of money!" heheld out his shaking hand to Zametov with notes in it. "Red notesand blue, twenty-five roubles. Where did I get them? And where didmy new clothes come from? You know I had not a copeck. You'vecross-examined my landlady, I'll be bound.... Well, that's enough!Assez cause! Till we meet again!"

　　He went out, trembling all over from a sort of wild hystericalsensation, in which there was an element of insufferable rapture.Yet he was gloomy and terribly tired. His face was twisted as aftera fit. His fatigue increased rapidly. Any shock, any irritatingsensation stimulated and revived his energies at once, but hisstrength failed as quickly when the stimulus was removed.

　　Zametov, left alone, sat for a long time in the same place,plunged in thought. Raskolnikov had unwittingly worked a revolution inhis brain on a certain point and had made up his mind for himconclusively.

　　"Ilya Petrovitch is a blockhead," he decided.

　　Raskolnikov had hardly opened the door of the restaurant when hestumbled against Razumihin on the steps. They did not see each othertill they almost knocked against each other. For a moment they stoodlooking each other up and down. Razumihin was greatly astounded,then anger, real anger gleamed fiercely in his eyes.

　　"So here you are!" he shouted at the top of his voice- "you ran awayfrom your bed! And here I've been looking for you under the sofa! Wewent up to the garret. I almost beat Nastasya on your account. Andhere he is after all. Rodya! What is the meaning of it? Tell me thewhole truth! Confess! Do you hear?"

　　"It means that I'm sick to death of you all and I want to be alone,"Raskolnikov answered calmly.

　　"Alone? When you are not able to walk, when your face is as white asa sheet and you are gasping for breath! Idiot!... What have you beendoing in the Palais de Crystal? Own up at once!"

　　"Let me go!" said Raskolnikov and tried to pass him. This was toomuch for Razumihin; he gripped him firmly by the shoulder.

　　"Let you go? You dare tell me to let you go? Do you know what I'lldo with you directly? I'll pick you up, tie you up in a bundle,carry you home under my arm and lock you up!"

　　"Listen, Razumihin," Raskolnikov began quietly, apparently calm-"can't you see that I don't want your benevolence? A strange desireyou have to shower benefits on a man who... curses them, who feelsthem a burden in fact! Why did you seek me out at the beginning ofmy illness? Maybe I was very glad to die. Didn't I tell you plainlyenough to-day that you were torturing me, that I was... sick of you!You seem to want to torture people! I assure you that all that isseriously hindering my recovery, because it's continually irritatingme. You saw Zossimov went away just now to avoid irritating me. Youleave me alone too, for goodness' sake! What right have you, indeed,to keep me by force? Don't you see that I am in possession of all myfaculties now? How, can I persuade you not to persecute me with yourkindness? I may be ungrateful, I may be mean, only let me be, forGod's sake, let me be! Let me be, let me be!"

　　He began calmly, gloating beforehand over the venomous phrases hewas about to utter, but finished, panting for breath, in a frenzy,as he had been with Luzhin.

　　Razumihin stood a moment, thought and let his hand drop.

　　"Well, go to hell then," he said gently and thoughtfully. "Stay," heroared, as Raskolnikov was about to move. "Listen to me. Let me tellyou, that you are all a set of babbling, posing idiots! If you'veany little trouble you brood over it like a hen over an egg. And youare plagiarists even in that! There isn't a sign of independent lifein you! You are made of spermaceti ointment and you've lymph in yourveins instead of blood. I don't believe in any one of you! In anycircumstances the first thing for all of you is to be unlike a humanbeing! Stop!" he cried with redoubled fury, noticing thatRaskolnikov was again making a movement- "hear me out! You know I'mhaving a house-warming this evening, I dare say they've arrived bynow, but I left my uncle there- I just ran in- to receive theguests. And if you weren't a fool, a common fool, a perfect fool, ifyou were an original instead of a translation... you see, Rodya, Irecognise you're a clever fellow, but you're a fool!- and if youweren't a fool you'd come round to me this evening instead ofwearing out your boots in the street! Since you have gone out, there'sno help for it! I'd give you a snug easy chair, my landlady has one...a cup of tea, company.... Or you could lie on the sofa- any way youwould be with us.... Zossimov will be there too. Will you come?"

　　"No."

　　"R-rubbish!" Razumihin shouted, out of patience. "How do you know?You can't answer for yourself! You don't know anything about it....Thousands of times I've fought tooth and nail with people and run backto them afterwards.... One feels ashamed and goes back to a man! Soremember, Potchinkov's house on the third storey...."

　　"Why, Mr. Razumihin, I do believe you'd let anybody beat you fromsheer benevolence."

　　"Beat? Whom? Me? I'd twist his nose off at the mere idea!Potchinkov's house, 47, Babushkin's flat...."

　　"I shall not come, Razumihin." Raskolnikov turned and walked away.

　　"I bet you will," Razumihin shouted after him. "I refuse to know youif you don't! Stay, hey, is Zametov in there?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Did you see him?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Talked to him?"

　　"Yes."

　　"What about? Confound you, don't tell me then. Potchinkov's house,47, Babushkin's flat, remember!"

　　Raskolnikov walked on and turned the corner into Sadovy Street.Razumihin looked after him thoughtfully. Then with a wave of hishand he went into the house but stopped short of the stairs.

　　"Confound it," he went on almost aloud. "He talked sensibly butyet... I am a fool! As if madmen didn't talk sensibly! And this wasjust what Zossimov seemed afraid of." He struck his finger on hisforehead. "What if... how could I let him go off alone? He may drownhimself.... Ach, what a blunder! I can't." And he ran back to overtakeRaskolnikov, but there was no trace of him. With a curse he returnedwith rapid steps to the Palais de Crystal to question Zametov.

　　Raskolnikov walked straight to X__ Bridge, stood in the middle,and leaning both elbows on the rail stared into the distance. Onparting with Razumihin, he felt so much weaker that he couldscarcely reach this place. He longed to sit or lie down somewhere inthe street. Bending over the water, he gazed mechanically at thelast pink flush of the sunset, at the row of houses growing dark inthe gathering twilight, at one distant attic window on the leftbank, flashing as though on fire in the last rays of the settingsun, at the darkening water of the canal, and the water seemed tocatch his attention. At last red circles flashed before his eyes,the houses seemed moving, the passers-by, the canal banks, thecarriages, all danced before his eyes. Suddenly he started, savedagain perhaps from swooning by an uncanny and hideous sight. He becameaware of some one standing on the right side of him; he looked and sawa tall woman with a kerchief on her head, with a long, yellow,wasted face and red sunken eyes. She was looking straight at him,but obviously she saw nothing and recognized no one. Suddenly sheleaned her right hand on the parapet, lifted her right leg over therailing, then her left and threw herself into the canal. The filthywater parted and swallowed up its victim for a moment, but aninstant later the drowning woman floated to the surface, moving slowlywith the current, her head and legs in the water, her skirt inflatedlike a balloon over her back.

　　"A woman drowning! A woman drowning!" shouted dozens of voices;people ran up, both banks were thronged with spectators, on the bridgepeople crowded about Raskolnikov, pressing up behind him.

　　"Mercy on it! it's our Afrosinya!" a woman cried tearfully close by."Mercy! save her! kind people, pull her out!"

　　"A boat, a boat" was shouted in the crowd. But there was no needof a boat; a policeman ran down the steps to the canal, threw offhis great coat and his boots and rushed into the water. It was easy toreach her; she floated within a couple of yards from the steps, hecaught hold of her clothes with his right hand and with his leftseized a pole which a comrade held out to him; the drowning womanwas pulled out at once. They laid her on the granite pavement of theembankment. She soon recovered consciousness, raised her head, satup and began sneezing and coughing, stupidly wiping her wet dress withher hands. She said nothing.

　　"She's drunk herself out of her senses," the same woman's voicewailed at her side. "Out of her senses. The other day she tried tohang herself, we cut her down. I ran out to the shop just now, left mylittle girl to look after her- and here she's in trouble again! Aneighbour, gentleman neighbour, we live close by, the second housefrom the end, see yonder...."

　　The crowd broke up. The police still remained round the woman,some one mentioned the police station.... Raskolnikov looked on with astrange sensation of indifference and apathy. He felt disgusted."No, that's loathsome... water... it's not good enough," he mutteredto himself. "Nothing will come of it," he added, "no use to wait. Whatabout the police office...? And why isn't Zametov at the policeoffice? The police office is open till ten o'clock...." He turnedhis back to the railing and looked about him.

　　"Very well then!" he said resolutely; he moved from the bridge andwalked in the direction of the police office. His heart felt hollowand empty. He did not want to think. Even his depression had passed,there was not a trace now of the energy with which he had set out"to make an end of it all." Complete apathy had succeeded to it.

　　"Well, it's a way out of it," he thought, walking slowly andlistlessly along the canal bank. "Anyway I'll make an end, for Iwant to.... But is it a way out? What does it matter! There'll bethe square yard of space- ha! But what an end! Is it really the end?Shall I tell them or not? Ah... damn! How tired I am! If I couldfind somewhere to sit or lie down soon! What I am most ashamed of isits being so stupid. But I don't care about that either! Whatidiotic ideas come into one's head."

　　To reach the police office he had to go straight forward and takethe second turning to the left. It was only a few paces away. But atthe first turning he stopped and, after a minute's thought, turnedinto a side street and went two streets out of his way, possiblywithout any object, or possibly to delay a minute and gain time. Hewalked, looking at the ground; suddenly some one seemed to whisperin his ear; he lifted his head and saw that he was standing at thevery gate of the house. He had not passed it, he had not been nearit since that evening. An overwhelming unaccountable prompting drewhim on. He went into the house, passed through the gateway, theninto the first entrance on the right, and began mounting thefamiliar staircase to the fourth storey. The narrow, steep staircasewas very dark. He stopped at each landing and looked round him withcuriosity; on the first landing the framework of the window had beentaken out. "That wasn't so then," he thought. Here was the flat on thesecond storey where Nikolay and Dmitri had been working. "It's shut upand the door newly painted. So it's to let." Then the third storey andthe fourth. "Here!" He was perplexed to find the door of the flat wideopen. There were men there, he could hear voices; he had notexpected that. After brief hesitation he mounted the last stairs andwent into the flat. It, too, was being done up; there were workmenin it. This seemed to amaze him; he somehow fancied that he would findeverything as he left it, even perhaps the corpses in the sameplaces on the floor. And now, bare walls, no furniture; it seemedstrange. He walked to the window and sat down on the window sill.There were two workmen, both young fellows, but one much youngerthan the other. They were papering the walls with a new white papercovered with lilac flowers, instead of the old, dirty, yellow one.Raskolnikov for some reason felt horribly annoyed by this. He lookedat the new paper with dislike, as though he felt sorry to have itall so changed. The workmen had obviously stayed beyond their time andnow they were hurriedly rolling up their paper and getting ready to gohome. They took no notice of Raskolnikov's coming in; they weretalking. Raskolnikov folded his arms and listened.

　　"She comes to me in the morning," said the elder to the younger,"very early, all dressed up. 'Why are you preening and prinking?' saysI. 'I am ready to do anything to please you, Tit Vassilitch!' That's away of going on! And she dressed up like a regular fashion book!"

　　"And what is a fashion book?" the younger one asked. He obviouslyregarded the other as an authority.

　　"A fashion book is a lot of pictures, coloured, and they come to thetailors here every Saturday, by post from abroad, to show folks how todress, the male sex as well as the female. They're pictures. Thegentlemen are generally wearing fur coats and for the ladies'fluffles, they're beyond anything you can fancy."

　　"There's nothing you can't find in Petersburg," the younger criedenthusiastically, "except father and mother, there's everything!"

　　"Except them, there's everything to be found, my boy," the elderdeclared sententiously.

　　Raskolnikov got up and walked into the other room where the strongbox, the bed, and the chest of drawers had been; the room seemed tohim very tiny without furniture in it. The paper was the same; thepaper in the corner showed where the case of ikons had stood. Helooked at it and went to the window. The elder workman looked at himaskance.

　　"What do you want?" he asked suddenly.

　　Instead of answering Raskolnikov went into the passage and pulledthe bell. The same bell, the same cracked note. He rang it a secondand a third time; he listened and remembered. The hideous andagonisingly fearful sensation he had felt then began to come back moreand more vividly. He shuddered at every ring and it gave him moreand more satisfaction.

　　"Well, what do you want? Who are you?" the workman shouted, goingout to him. Raskolnikov went inside again.

　　"I want to take a flat," he said. "I am looking round."

　　"It's not the time to look at rooms at night! and you ought tocome up with the porter."

　　"The floors have been washed, will they be painted?" Raskolnikovwent on. "Is there no blood?"

　　"What blood?"

　　"Why, the old woman and her sister were murdered here. There was aperfect pool there."

　　"But who are you?" the workman cried, uneasy.

　　"Who am I?"

　　"Yes."

　　"You want to know? Come to the police station, I'll tell you."

　　The workmen looked at him in amazement.

　　"It's time for us to go, we are late. Come along, Alyoshka. Wemust lock up," said the elder workman.

　　"Very well, come along," said Raskolnikov indifferently, and goingout first, he went slowly downstairs. "Hey, porter," he cried in thegateway.

　　At the entrance several people were standing, staring at thepassers-by; the two porters, a peasant woman, a man in a long coat anda few others. Raskolnikov went straight up to them.

　　"What do you want?" asked one of the porters.

　　"Have you been to the police office?"

　　"I've just been there. What do you want?"

　　"Is it open?"

　　"Of course."

　　"Is the assistant there?"

　　"He was there for a time. What do you want?"

　　Raskolnikov made no reply, but stood beside them lost in thought.

　　"He's been to look at the flat," said the elder workman, comingforward.

　　"Which flat?"

　　"Where we are at work. 'Why have you washed away the blood?' sayshe. 'There has been a murder here,' says he, 'and I've come to takeit.' And he began ringing at the bell, all but broke it. 'Come tothe police station,' says he. 'I'll tell you everything there.' Hewouldn't leave us."

　　The porter looked at Raskolnikov, frowning and perplexed.

　　"Who are you?" he shouted as impressively as he could.

　　"I am Rodion Romanovitch Raskolnikov, formerly a student, I livein Shil's house, not far from here, flat Number 14, ask the porter, heknows me." Raskolnikov said all this in a lazy, dreamy voice, notturning round, but looking intently into the darkening street.

　　"Why have you been to the flat?"

　　"To look at it."

　　"What is there to look at?"

　　"Take him straight to the police station," the man in the longcoat jerked in abruptly.

　　Raskolnikov looked intently at him over his shoulder and said in thesame slow, lazy tone:

　　"Come along."

　　"Yes, take him," the man went on more confidently. "Why was he goinginto that, what's in his mind, eh?"

　　"He's not drunk, but God knows what's the matter with him," mutteredthe workman.

　　"But what do you want?" the porter shouted again, beginning to getangry in earnest- "Why are you hanging about?"

　　"You funk the police station then?" said Raskolnikov jeeringly.

　　"How funk it? Why are you hanging about?"

　　"He's a rogue!" shouted the peasant woman.

　　"Why waste time talking to him?" cried the other porter, a hugepeasant in a full open coat and with keys on his belt. "Get along!He is a rogue and no mistake. Get along!"

　　And seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder he flung him into thestreet. He lurched forward, but recovered his footing, looked at thespectators in silence and walked away.

　　"Strange man!" observed the workman.

　　"There are strange folks about nowadays," said the woman.

　　"You should have taken him to the police station all the same," saidthe man in the long coat.

　　"Better have nothing to do with him," decided the big porter. "Aregular rogue! Just what he wants, you may be sure, but once takehim up, you won't get rid of him.... We know the sort!"

　　"Shall I go there or not?" thought Raskolnikov, standing in themiddle of the thoroughfare at the cross roads, and he looked abouthim, as though expecting from some one a decisive word. But no soundcame, all was dead and silent like the stones on which he walked, deadto him, to him alone.... All at once at the end of the street, twohundred yards away, in the gathering dusk he saw a crowd and heardtalk and shouts. In the middle of the crowd stood a carriage.... Alight gleamed in the middle of the street. "What is it?" Raskolnikovturned to the right and went up to the crowd. He seemed to clutch ateverything and smiled coldly when he recognised it, for he had fullymade up his mind to go to the police station and knew that it wouldall soon be over.

　　Chapter Seven

　　AN ELEGANT carriage stood in the middle of the road with a pair ofspirited grey horses; there was no one in it, and the coachman had gotoff his box and stood by; the horses were being held by thebridle... A mass of people had gathered round, the police standingin front. One of them held a lighted lantern which he was turning onsomething lying close to the wheels. Every one was talking,shouting, exclaiming; the coachman seemed at a loss and keptrepeating:

　　"What a misfortune! Good Lord, what a misfortune!"

　　Raskolnikov pushed his way in as far as he could, and succeeded atlast in seeing the object of the commotion and interest. On the grounda man who had been run over lay apparently unconscious, and coveredwith blood; he was very badly dressed, but not like a workman. Bloodwas flowing from his head and face; his face was crushed, mutilatedand disfigured. He was evidently badly injured.

　　"Merciful heaven!" wailed the coachman, "what more could I do? IfI'd been driving fast or had not shouted to him, but I was goingquietly, not in a hurry. Every one could see I was going along justlike everybody else. A drunken man can't walk straight, we allknow.... I saw him crossing the street, staggering and almost falling.I shouted again and a second and a third time, then I held thehorses in, but he fell straight under their feet! Either he did iton purpose or he was very tipsy.... The horses are young and readyto take fright... they started, he screamed... that made them worse.That's how it happened!"

　　"That's just how it was," a voice in the crowd confirmed.

　　"He shouted, that's true, he shouted three times," another voicedeclared.

　　"Three times it was, we all heard it," shouted a third.

　　But the coachman was not very much distressed and frightened. It wasevident that the carriage belonged to a rich and important personwho was awaiting it somewhere; the police, of course, were in nolittle anxiety to avoid upsetting his arrangements. All they had to dowas to take the injured man to the police station and the hospital. Noone knew his name.

　　Meanwhile Raskolnikov had squeezed in and stooped closer over him.The lantern suddenly lighted up the unfortunate man's face. Herecognised him.

　　"I know him! I know him!" he shouted, pushing to the front. "It'sa government clerk retired from the service, Marmeladov. He livesclose by in Kozel's house.... Make haste for a doctor! I will pay,see." He pulled money out of his pocket and showed it to thepoliceman. He was in violent agitation.

　　The police were glad that they had found out who the man was.Raskolnikov gave his own name and address, and, as earnestly as ifit had been his father, he besought the police to carry theunconscious Marmeladov to his lodging at once.

　　"Just here, three houses away," he said eagerly, "the housebelongs to Kozel, a rich German. He was going home, no doubt drunk.I know him, he is a drunkard. He has a family there, a wife, children,he has one daughter.... It will take time to take him to the hospital,and there is sure to be a doctor in the house. I'll pay, I'll pay!At least he will be looked after at home... they will help him atonce. But he'll die before you get him to the hospital." He managed toslip something unseen into the policeman's hand. But the thing wasstraightforward and legitimate, and in any case help was closerhere. They raised the injured man; people volunteered to help.

　　Kozel's house was thirty yards away. Raskolnikov walked behind,carefully holding Marmeladov's head and showing the way.

　　"This way, this way! We must take him upstairs head foremost. Turnround! I'll pay, I'll make it worth your while," he muttered.

　　Katerina Ivanovna had just begun, as she always did at every freemoment, walking to and fro in her little room from window to stove andback again, with her arms folded across her chest, talking toherself and coughing. Of late she had begun to talk more than everto her eldest girl, Polenka, a child of ten, who, though there wasmuch she did not understand, understood very well that her motherneeded her, and so always watched her with her big clever eyes andstrove her utmost to appear to understand. This time Polenka wasundressing her little brother, who had been unwell all day and wasgoing to bed. The boy was waiting for her to take off his shirt, whichhad to be washed at night. He was sitting straight and motionless on achair, with a silent, serious face, with his legs stretched outstraight before him- heels together and toes turned out.

　　He was listening to what his mother was saying to his sister,sitting perfectly still with pouting lips and wide-open eyes, justas all good little boys have to sit when they are undressed to go tobed. A little girl, still younger, dressed literally in rags, stood atthe screen, waiting for her turn. The door on to the stairs was opento relieve them a little from the clouds of tobacco smoke whichfloated in from the other rooms and brought on long terrible fits ofcoughing in the poor, consumptive woman. Katerina Ivanovna seemed tohave grown even thinner during that week and the hectic flush on herface was brighter than ever.

　　"You wouldn't believe, you can't imagine, Polenka," she said,walking about the room, "what a happy luxurious life we had in mypapa's house and how this drunkard has brought me, and will bringyou all, to ruin! Papa was a civil colonel and only a step frombeing a governor; so that every one who came to see him said, 'We lookupon you, Ivan Mihailovitch, as our governor!' When I... when..."she coughed violently, "oh, cursed life," she cried, clearing herthroat and pressing her hands to her breast, "when I... when at thelast ball... at the marshal's... Princess Bezzemelny saw me- whogave me the blessing when your father and I were married, Polenka- sheasked at once 'Isn't that the pretty girl who donced the shawl danceat the breaking up?' (You must mend that tear, you must take yourneedle and darn it as I showed you, or to-morrow- cough, cough, cough-he will make the hole bigger," she articulated with effort.) "PrinceSchegolskoy, a kammerjunker, had just come from Petersburg then...he danced the mazurka with me and wanted to make me an offer next day;but I thanked him in flattering expressions and told him that my hearthad long been another's. That other was your father, Polya; papa wasfearfully angry.... Is the water ready? Give me the shirt, and thestockings! Lida," said she to the youngest one, "you must managewithout your chemise to-night... and lay your stockings out with it...I'll wash them together.... How is it that drunken vagabond doesn'tcome in? He has worn his shirt till it looks like a dishclout, hehas torn it to rags! I'd do it all together, so as not to have to worktwo nights running! Oh, dear! (Cough, cough, cough, cough!) Again!What's this?" she cried, noticing a crowd in the passage and the menwho were pushing into her room, carrying a burden. "What is it? Whatare they bringing? Mercy on us!"

　　"Where are we to put him?" asked the policeman, looking round whenMarmeladov, unconscious and covered with blood, had been carried in.

　　"On the sofa! Put him straight on the sofa, with his head this way,"Raskolnikov showed him.

　　"Run over in the road! Drunk!" some one shouted in the passage.

　　Katerina Ivanovna stood, turning white and gasping for breath. Thechildren were terrified. Little Lida screamed, rushed to Polenka andclutched at her, trembling all over.

　　Having laid Marmeladov down, Raskolnikov flew to Katerina Ivanovna.

　　"For God's sake be calm, don't be frightened!" he said, speakingquickly, "he was crossing the road and was run over by a carriage,don't be frightened, he will come to, I told them bring him here...I've been here already, you remember? He will come to; I'll pay!"

　　"He's done it this time!" Katerina Ivanovna cried despairingly andshe rushed to her husband.

　　Raskolnikov noticed at once that she was not one of those womenwho swoon easily. She instantly placed under the luckless man's head apillow, which no one had thought of and began undressing and examininghim. She kept her head, forgetting herself, biting her tremblinglips and stifling the screams which were ready to break from her.

　　Raskolnikov meanwhile induced some one to run for a doctor. Therewas a doctor, it appeared, next door but one.

　　"I've sent for a doctor," he kept assuring Katerina Ivanovna, "don'tbe uneasy, I'll pay. Haven't you water?... and give me a napkin or atowel, anything, as quick as you can.... He is injured, but notkilled, believe me.... We shall see what the doctor says!"

　　Katerina Ivanovna ran to the window; there, on a broken chair in thecorner, a large earthenware basin full of water had been stood, inreadiness for washing her children's and husband's linen that night.This washing was done by Katerina Ivanovna at night at least twice aweek, if not oftener. For the family had come to such a pass that theywere practically without change of linen, and Katerina Ivanovnacould not endure uncleanliness and, rather than see dirt in the house,she preferred to wear herself out at night, working beyond herstrength when the rest were asleep, so as to get the wet linen hung ona line and dry by the morning. She took up the basin of water atRaskolnikov's request, but almost fell down with her burden. But thelatter had already succeeded in finding a towel, wetted it and begunwashing the blood off Marmeladov's face.

　　Katerina Ivanovna stood by, breathing painfully and pressing herhands to her breast. She was in need of attention herself. Raskolnikovbegan to realise that he might have made a mistake in having theinjured man brought here. The policeman, too, stood in hesitation.

　　"Polenka," cried Katerina Ivanovna, "run to Sonia, make haste. Ifyou don't find her at home, leave word that her father has been runover and that she is to come here at once... when she comes in. Run,Polenka! there, put on the shawl."

　　"Run your fastest!" cried the little boy on the chair suddenly,after which he relapsed into the same dumb rigidity, with roundeyes, his heels thrust forward and his toes spread out.

　　Meanwhile the room had become so full of people that you couldn'thave dropped a pin. The policemen left, all except one, who remainedfor a time, trying to drive out the people who came in from thestairs. Almost all Madame Lippevechsel's lodgers had streamed infrom the inner rooms of the flat; at first they were squeezed togetherin the doorway, but afterwards they overflowed into the room. KaterinaIvanovna flew into a fury.

　　"You might let him die in peace, at least," she shouted at thecrowd, "is it a spectacle for you to gape at? With cigarettes! (Cough,cough, cough!) You might as well keep your hats on.... And there isone in his hat!... Get away! You should respect the dead, at least!"

　　Her cough choked her- but her reproaches were not without result.They evidently stood in some awe of Katerina Ivanovna. The lodgers,one after another, squeezed back into the doorway with that strangeinner feeling of satisfaction which may be observed in the presence ofa sudden accident, even in those nearest and dearest to the victim,from which no living man is exempt, even in spite of the sincerestsympathy and compassion.

　　Voices outside were heard, however, speaking of the hospital andsaying that they'd no business to make a disturbance here.

　　"No business to die!" cried Katerina Ivanovna, and she was rushingto the door to vent her wrath upon them, but in the doorway cameface to face with Madame Lippevechsel who had only just heard of theaccident and ran in to restore order. She was a particularlyquarrelsome and irresponsible German.

　　"Ah, my God!" she cried, clasping her hands, "your husband drunkenhorses have trampled! To the hospital with him! I am the landlady!"

　　"Amalia Ludwigovna, I beg you to recollect what you are saying,"Katerina Ivanovna began haughtily (she always took a haughty tone withthe landlady that she might "remember her place" and even now couldnot deny herself this satisfaction). "Amalia Ludwigovna..."

　　"I have you once before told that you to call me Amalia Ludwigovnamay not dare; I am Amalia Ivanovna."

　　"You are not Amalia Ivanovna, but Amalia Ludwigovna, and as I am notone of your despicable flatterers like Mr. Lebeziatnikov, who'slaughing behind the door at this moment (a laugh and a cry of 'theyare at it again' was in fact audible at the door) so I shall alwayscall you Amalia Ludwigovna, though I fail to understand why youdislike that name. You can see for yourself what has happened toSemyon Zaharovitch; he is dying. I beg you to close that door atonce and to admit no one. Let him at least die in peace! Or I warn youthe Governor-General, himself, shall be informed of your conductto-morrow. The prince knew me as a girl; he remembers SemyonZaharovitch well and has often been a benefactor to him. Every oneknows that Semyon Zaharovitch had many friends and protectors, whom heabandoned himself from an honourable pride, knowing his unhappyweakness, but now (she pointed to Raskolnikov) a generous young manhas come to our assistance, who has wealth and connections and whomSemyon Zaharovitch has known from a child. You may rest assured,Amalia Ludwigovna..."

　　All this was uttered with extreme rapidity, getting quicker andquicker, but a cough suddenly cut short Katerina Ivanovna's eloquence.At that instant the dying man recovered consciousness and uttered agroan; she ran to him. The injured man opened his eyes and withoutrecognition or understanding gazed at Raskolnikov who was bending overhim. He drew deep, slow, painful breaths; blood oozed at the cornersof his mouth and drops of perspiration came out on his forehead. Notrecognising Raskolnikov, he began looking round uneasily. KaterinaIvanovna looked at him with a sad but stern face, and tears trickledfrom her eyes.

　　"My God! His whole chest is crushed! How he is bleeding," she saidin despair. "We must take off his clothes. Turn a little, SemyonZaharovitch, if you can," she cried to him.

　　Marmeladov recognised her.

　　"A priest," he articulated huskily.

　　Katerina Ivanovna walked to the window, laid her head against thewindow frame and exclaimed in despair:

　　"Oh, cursed life!"

　　"A priest," the dying man said again after a moment's silence.

　　"They've gone for him," Katerina Ivanovna shouted to him, heobeyed her shout and was silent. With sad and timid eyes he looked forher; she returned and stood by his pillow. He seemed a little easierbut not for long.

　　Soon his eyes rested on little Lida, his favourite, who wasshaking in the corner, as though she were in a fit, and staring at himwith her wondering childish eyes.

　　"A-ah," he signed towards her uneasily. He wanted to say something.

　　"What now?" cried Katerina Ivanovna.

　　"Barefoot, barefoot!" he muttered, indicating with frenzied eyes thechild's bare feet.

　　"Be silent," Katerina Ivanovna cried irritably, "you know why she isbarefooted."

　　"Thank God, the doctor," exclaimed Raskolnikov, relieved.

　　The doctor came in, a precise little old man, a German, lookingabout him mistrustfully; he went up to the sick man, took his pulse,carefully felt his head and with the help of Katerina Ivanovna heunbuttoned the blood-stained shirt, and bared the injured man's chest.It was gashed, crushed and fractured, several ribs on the right sidewere broken. On the left side, just over the heart, was a large,sinister-looking yellowish-black bruise- a cruel kick from the horse'shoof. The doctor frowned. The policeman told him that he was caught inthe wheel and turned round with it for thirty yards on the road.

　　"It's wonderful that he has recovered consciousness," the doctorwhispered softly to Raskolnikov.

　　"What do you think of him?" he asked.

　　"He will die immediately."

　　"Is there really no hope?"

　　"Not the faintest! He is at the last gasp.... His head is badlyinjured, too... Him... I could bleed him if you like, but... itwould be useless. He is bound to die within the next five or tenminutes."

　　"Better bleed him then."

　　"If you like.... But I warn you it will be perfectly useless."

　　At that moment other steps were heard; the crowd in the passageparted, and the priest, a little, grey old man, appeared in thedoorway bearing the sacrament. A policeman had gone for him at thetime of the accident. The doctor changed places with him, exchangingglances with him. Raskolnikov begged the doctor to remain a littlewhile. He shrugged his shoulders and remained.

　　All stepped back. The confession was soon over. The dying manprobably understood little; he could only utter indistinct brokensounds. Katerina Ivanovna took little Lida, lifted the boy from thechair, knelt down in the corner by the stove and made the childrenkneel in front of her. The little girl was still trembling; but theboy, kneeling on his little bare knees, lifted his handrhythmically, crossing himself with precision and bowed down, touchingthe floor with his forehead, which seemed to afford him especialsatisfaction. Katerina Ivanovna bit her lips and held back hertears; she prayed, too, now and then pulling straight the boy's shirt,and managed to cover the girl's bare shoulders with a kerchief,which she took from the chest without rising from her knees or ceasingto pray. Meanwhile the door from the inner rooms was openedinquisitively again. In the passage the crowd of spectators from allthe flats on the staircase grew denser and denser, but they did notventure beyond the threshold. A single candle-end lighted up thescene.

　　At that moment Polenka forced her way through the crowd at the door.She came in panting from running so fast, took off her kerchief,looked for her mother, went up to her and said, "She's coming, I mether in the street." Her mother made her kneel beside her.

　　Timidly and noiselessly a young girl made her way through the crowd,and strange was her appearance in that room, in the midst of want,rags, death and despair. She, too, was in rags, her attire was allof the cheapest, but decked out in gutter finery of a special stamp,unmistakably betraying its shameful purpose. Sonia stopped short inthe doorway and looked about her bewildered, unconscious ofeverything. She forgot her fourth-hand, gaudy silk dress, sounseemly here with its ridiculous long train, and her immensecrinoline that filled up the whole doorway, and her light-colouredshoes, and the parasol she brought with her, though it was no use atnight, and the absurd round straw hat with its flaringflame-coloured feather. Under this rakishly-tilted hat was a pale,frightened little face with lips parted and eyes staring in terror.Sonia was a small thin girl of eighteen with fair hair, rather pretty,with wonderful blue eyes. She looked intently at the bed and thepriest; she too was out of breath with running. At last whispers, somewords in the crowd probably, reached her. She looked down and took astep forward into the room, still keeping close to the door.

　　The service was over. Katerina Ivanovna went up to her husbandagain. The priest stepped back and turned to say a few words ofadmonition and consolation to Katerina Ivanovna on leaving.

　　"What am I to do with these?" she interrupted sharply and irritably,pointing to the little ones.

　　"God is merciful; look to the Most High for succour," the priestbegan.

　　"Ach! He is merciful, but not to us."

　　"That's a sin, a sin, madam," observed the priest, shaking his head.

　　"And isn't that a sin?" cried Katerina Ivanovna, pointing to thedying man.

　　"Perhaps those who have involuntarily caused the accident will agreeto compensate you, at least for the loss of his earnings."

　　"You don't understand!" cried Katerina Ivanovna angrily waving herhand. "And why should they compensate me? Why, he was drunk andthrew himself under the horses! What earnings? He brought us innothing but misery. He drank everything away, the drunkard! Herobbed us to get drink, he wasted their lives and mine for drink!And thank God he's dying! One less to keep!"

　　"You must forgive in the hour of death, that's a sin, madam, suchfeelings are a great sin."

　　Katerina Ivanovna was busy with the dying man; she was giving himwater, wiping the blood and sweat from his head, setting his pillowstraight, and had only turned now and then for a moment to address thepriest. Now she flew at him almost in a frenzy.

　　"Ah, father! That's words and only words! Forgive! If he'd notbeen run over, he'd have come home to-day drunk and his only shirtdirty and in rags and he'd have fallen asleep like a log, and I shouldhave been sousing and rinsing till daybreak, washing his rags andthe children's and then drying them by the window and as soon as itwas daylight I should have been darning them. That's how I spend mynights!... What's the use of talking of forgiveness! I have forgivenas it is!"

　　A terrible hollow cough interrupted her words. She put herhandkerchief to her lips and showed it to the priest, pressing herother hand to her aching chest. The handkerchief was covered withblood. The priest bowed his head and said nothing.

　　Marmeladov was in the last agony; he did not take his eyes off theface of Katerina Ivanovna, who was bending over him again. He kepttrying to say something to her; he began moving his tongue withdifficulty and articulating indistinctly, but Katerina Ivanovna,understanding that he wanted to ask her forgiveness, calledperemptorily to him:

　　"Be silent! No need! I know what you want to say!" And the sickman was silent, but at the same instant his wandering eyes strayedto the doorway and he saw Sonia.

　　Till then he had not noticed her: she was standing in the shadowin a corner.

　　"Who's that? Who's that?" he said suddenly in a thick gasping voice,in agitation, turning his eyes in horror towards the door where hisdaughter was standing, and trying to sit up.

　　"Lie down! Lie do-own!" cried Katerina Ivanovna.

　　With unnatural strength he had succeeded in propping himself onhis elbow. He looked wildly and fixedly for some time on his daughter,as though not recognising her. He had never seen her before in suchattire. Suddenly he recognised her, crushed and ashamed in herhumiliation and gaudy finery, meekly awaiting her turn to say good-byeto her dying father. His face showed intense suffering.

　　"Sonia! Daughter! Forgive!" he cried, and he tried to hold out hishand to her, but losing his balance, he fell off the sofa, facedownwards on the floor. They rushed to pick him up, they put him onthe sofa; but he was dying. Sonia with a faint cry ran up, embracedhim and remained so without moving. He died in her arms.

　　"He's got what he wanted," Katerina Ivanovna cried, seeing herhusband's dead body. "Well, what's to be done now? How am I to buryhim! What can I give them to-morrow to eat?"

　　Raskolnikov went up to Katerina Ivanovna.

　　"Katerina Ivanovna," he began, "last week your husband told me allhis life and circumstances.... Believe me, he spoke of you withpassionate reverence. From that evening, when I learnt how devotedhe was to you all and how he loved and respected you especially,Katerina Ivanovna, in spite of his unfortunate weakness, from thatevening we became friends.... Allow me now... to do something... torepay my debt to my dead friend. Here are twenty roubles I think-and if that can be of any assistance to you, then... I... in short,I will come again, I will be sure to come again... I shall, perhaps,come again to-morrow.... Good-bye!"

　　And he went quickly out of the room, squeezing his way through thecrowd to the stairs. But in the crowd he suddenly jostled againstNikodim Fomitch, who had heard of the accident and had come to giveinstructions in person. They had not met since the scene at the policestation, but Nikodim Fomitch knew him instantly.

　　"Ah, is that you?" he asked him.

　　"He's dead," answered Raskolnikov. "The doctor and the priest havebeen, all as it should have been. Don't worry the poor woman too much,she is in consumption as it is. Try and cheer her up, if possible...you are a kind-hearted man, I know..." he added with a smile,looking straight in his face.

　　"But you are spattered with blood," observed Nikodim Fomitch,noticing in the lamplight some fresh stains on Raskolnikov'swaistcoat.

　　"Yes... I'm covered with blood," Raskolnikov said with a peculiarair; then he smiled, nodded and went downstairs.

　　He walked down slowly and deliberately, feverish but not consciousof it, entirely absorbed in a new overwhelming sensation of life andstrength that surged up suddenly within him. This sensation might becompared to that of a man condemned to death who has suddenly beenpardoned. Halfway down the staircase he was overtaken by the priest onhis way home; Raskolnikov let him pass, exchanging a silent greetingwith him. He was just descending the last steps when he heard rapidfootsteps behind him. Some one overtook him; it was Polenka. She wasrunning after him, calling "Wait! wait!"

　　He turned round. She was at the bottom of the staircase andstopped short a step above him. A dim light came in from the yard.Raskolnikov could distinguish the child's thin but pretty little face,looking at him with a bright childish smile. She had run after himwith a message which she was evidently glad to give.

　　"Tell me, what is your name?... and where do you live?" she saidhurriedly in a breathless voice.

　　He laid both hands on her shoulders and looked at her with a sort ofrapture. It was such a joy to him to look at her, he could not havesaid why.

　　"Who sent you?"

　　"Sister Sonia sent me," answered the girl, smiling still morebrightly.

　　"I knew it was sister Sonia sent you."

　　"Mamma sent me, too... when sister Sonia was sending me, mammacame up, too, and said 'Run fast, Polenka.'"

　　"Do you love sister Sonia?"

　　"I love her more than any one," Polenka answered with a peculiarearnestness, and her smile became graver.

　　"And will you love me?"

　　By way of answer he saw the little girl's face approaching him,her full lips naively held out to kiss him. Suddenly her arms asthin as sticks held him tightly, her head rested on his shoulder andthe little girl wept softly, pressing her face against him.

　　"I am sorry for father," she said a moment later, raising hertear-stained face and brushing away the tears with her hands. "It'snothing but misfortunes now," she added suddenly with thatpeculiarly sedate air which children try hard to assume when they wantto speak like grown-up people.

　　"Did your father love you?"

　　"He loved Lida most," she went on very seriously without a smile,exactly like grown-up people, "he loved her because she is littleand because she is ill, too. And he always used to bring her presents.But he taught us to read and me grammar and scripture, too," she addedwith dignity. "And mother never used to say anything, but we knew thatshe liked it and father knew it, too. And mother wants to teach meFrench, for it's time my education began."

　　"And do you know your prayers?"

　　"Of course, we do! We knew them long ago. I say my prayers to myselfas I am a big girl now, but Kolya and Lida say them aloud with mother.First they repeat the 'Ave Maria' and then another prayer: 'Lord,forgive and bless Sister Sonia,' and then another, 'Lord, forgiveand bless our second father.' For our elder father is dead and this isanother one, but we do pray for the other as well."

　　"Polenka, my name is Rodion. Pray sometimes for me, too. 'And Thyservant Rodion,' nothing more."

　　"I'll pray for you all the rest of my life," the little girldeclared hotly, and suddenly smiling again she rushed at him andhugged him warmly once more.

　　Raskolnikov told her his name and address and promised to be sure tocome next day. The child went away quite enchanted with him. It waspast ten when he came out into the street. In five minutes he wasstanding on the bridge at the spot where the woman had jumped in.

　　"Enough," he pronounced resolutely and triumphantly. "I've done withfancies, imaginary terrors and phantoms! Life is real! haven't I livedjust now? My life has not yet died with that old woman! The Kingdom ofHeaven to her- and now enough, madam, leave me in peace! Now for thereign of reason and light... and of will, and of strength... and nowwe will see! We will try our strength!" he added defiantly, asthough challenging some power of darkness. "And I was ready to consentto live in a square of space!

　　"I am very weak at this moment, but... I believe my illness is allover. I knew it would be over when I went out. By the way,Potchinkov's house is only a few steps away. I certainly must go toRazumihin even if it were not close by... let him win his bet! Letus give him some satisfaction, too- no matter! Strength, strength iswhat one wants, you can get nothing without it, and strength must bewon by strength- that's what they don't know," he added proudly andself-confidently and he walked with flagging footsteps from thebridge. Pride and self-confidence grew continually stronger in him; hewas becoming a different man every moment. What was it had happened towork this revolution in him? He did not know himself; like a mancatching at a straw, he suddenly felt that he, too, 'could live,that there was still life for him, that his life had not died with theold woman.' Perhaps he was in too great a hurry with his conclusion,but he did not think of that.

　　"But I did ask her to remember 'Thy servant Rodion' in her prayers,"the idea struck him. "Well, that was... in case of emergency," headded and laughed himself at his boyish sally. He was in the best ofspirits.

　　He easily found Razumihin; the new lodger was already known atPotchinkov's and the porter at once showed him the way. Half-wayupstairs he could hear the noise and animated conversation of a biggathering of people. The door was wide open on the stairs; he couldhear exclamations and discussion. Razumihin's room was fairly large;the company consisted of fifteen people. Raskolnikov stopped in theentry, where two of the landlady's servants were busy behind ascreen with two samovars, bottles, plates and dishes of pie andsavouries, brought up from the landlady's kitchen. Raskolnikov sent infor Razumihin. He ran out delighted. At the first glance it wasapparent that he had had a great deal to drink and, though no amountof liquor made Razumihin quite drunk, this time he was perceptiblyaffected by it.

　　"Listen," Raskolnikov hastened to say, "I've only just come totell you you've won your bet and that no one really knows what may nothappen to him. I can't come in; I am so weak that I shall fall downdirectly. And so good evening and good-bye! Come and see meto-morrow."

　　"Do you know what? I'll see you home. If you say you're weakyourself, you must..."

　　"And your visitors? Who is the curly-headed one who has justpeeped out?"

　　"He? Goodness only knows! Some friend of uncle's I expect, orperhaps he has come without being invited... I'll leave uncle withthem, he is an invaluable person, pity I can't introduce you to himnow. But confound them all now! They won't notice me, and I need alittle fresh air, for you've come just in the nick of time- anothertwo minutes and I should have come to blows! They are talking such alot of wild stuff... you simply can't imagine what men will say!Though why shouldn't you imagine? Don't we talk nonsense ourselves?And let them... that's the way to learn not to!... Wait a minute, I'llfetch Zossimov."

　　Zossimov pounced upon Raskolnikov almost greedily; he showed aspecial interest in him; soon his face brightened.

　　"You must go to bed at once," he pronounced, examining the patientas far as he could, "and take something for the night. Will you takeit? I got it ready some time ago... a powder."

　　"Two, if you like," answered Raskolnikov. The powder was taken atonce.

　　"It's a good thing you are taking him home," observed Zossimov toRazumihin- "we shall see how he is to-morrow, to-day he's not at allamiss- a considerable change since the afternoon. Live and learn..."

　　"Do you know what Zossimov whispered to me when we were coming out?"Razumihin blurted out, as soon as they were in the street. "I won'ttell you everything, brother, because they are such fools. Zossimovtold me to talk freely to you on the way and get you to talk freely tome, and afterwards I am to tell him about it, for he's got a notion inhis head that you are... mad or close on it. Only fancy! In thefirst place, you've three times the brains he has; in the second, ifyou are not mad, you needn't care a hang that he has got such a wildidea; and thirdly, that piece of beef whose specialty is surgery hasgone mad on mental diseases, and what's brought him to this conclusionabout you was your conversation to-day with Zametov."

　　"Zametov told you all about it?"

　　"Yes, and he did well. Now I understand what it all means and sodoes Zametov.... Well, the fact is, Rodya... the point is... I am alittle drunk now.... But that's... no matter... the point is that thisidea... you understand? was just being hatched in their brains...you understand? That is, no one ventured to say it aloud, becausethe idea is too absurd and especially since the arrest of thatpainter, that bubble's burst and gone for ever. But why are theysuch fools? I gave Zametov a bit of a thrashing at the time- that'sbetween ourselves, brother; please don't let out a hint that youknow of it; I've noticed he is a ticklish subject; it was at LuiseIvanovna's. But to-day, to-day it's all cleared up. That IlyaPetrovitch is at the bottom of it! He took advantage of yourfainting at the police station, but he is ashamed of it himself now; Iknow that..."

　　Raskolnikov listened greedily. Razumihin was drunk enough to talktoo freely.

　　"I fainted then because it was so close and the smell of paint,"said Raskolnikov.

　　"No need to explain that! And it wasn't the paint only: the feverhad been coming on for a month; Zossimov testifies to that! But howcrushed that boy is now, you wouldn't believe! 'I am not worth hislittle finger,' he says. Yours, he means. He has good feelings attimes, brother. But the lesson, the lesson you gave him to-day inthe Palais de Crystal, that was too good for anything! Youfrightened him at first, you know, he nearly went into convulsions!You almost convinced him again of the truth of all that hideousnonsense, and then you suddenly- put out your tongue at him: 'Therenow, what do you make of it?' It was perfect! He is crushed,annihilated now! It was masterly, by Jove, it's what they deserve! Ah,that I wasn't there! He was hoping to see you awfully. Porfiry, too,wants to make your acquaintance..."

　　"Ah!... he too... but why did they put me down as mad?"

　　"Oh, not mad. I must have said too much, brother.... What struckhim, you see, was that only that subject seemed to interest you; nowit's clear why it did interest you; knowing all thecircumstances.... and how that irritated you and worked in with yourillness... I am a little drunk, brother, only, confound him, he hassome idea of his own... I tell you, he's mad on mental diseases. Butdon't you mind him..."

　　For half a minute both were silent.

　　"Listen, Razumihin," began Raskolnikov, "I want to tell you plainly:I've just been at a death-bed, a clerk who died... I gave them allmy money... and besides I've just been kissed by some one who, if Ihad killed any one, would just the same... in fact I saw some one elsethere... with a flame-coloured feather... but I am talking nonsense; Iam very weak, support me... we shall be at the stairs directly..."

　　"What's the matter? What's the matter with you?" Razumihin askedanxiously.

　　"I am a little giddy, but that's not the point, I am so sad, sosad... like a woman. Look, what's that? Look, look!"

　　"What is it?"

　　"Don't you see? A light in my room, you see? Through the crack..."

　　They were already at the foot of the last flight of stairs, at thelevel of the landlady's door, and they could, as a fact, see frombelow that there was a light in Raskolnikov's garret.

　　"Queer! Nastasya, perhaps," observed Razumihin.

　　"She is never in my room at this time and she must be in bed longago, but... I don't care! Good-bye!"

　　"What do you mean? I am coming with you, we'll come in together!"

　　"I know we are going in together, but I want to shake hands here andsay good-bye to you here. So give me your hand, good-bye!"

　　"What's the matter with you, Rodya?"

　　"Nothing... come along... you shall be witness."

　　They began mounting the stairs, and the idea struck Razumihin thatperhaps Zossimov might be right after all. "Ah, I've upset him with mychatter!" he muttered to himself.

　　When they reached the door they heard voices in the room.

　　"What is it?" cried Razumihin. Raskolnikov was the first to open thedoor; he flung it wide and stood still in the doorway, dumbfounded.

　　His mother and sister were sitting on his sofa and had beenwaiting an hour and a half for him. Why had he never expected, neverthought of them, though the news that they had started, were ontheir way and would arrive immediately, had been repeated to himonly that day? They had spent that hour and a half plying Nastasyawith questions. She was standing before them and had told themeverything by now. They were beside themselves with alarm when theyheard of his "running away" to-day, ill and, as they understood fromher story, delirious! "Good Heavens, what had become of him?" Both hadbeen weeping, both had been in anguish for that hour and a half.

　　A cry of joy, of ecstasy, greeted Raskolnikov's entrance. Bothrushed to him. But he stood like one dead; a sudden intolerablesensation struck him like a thunderbolt. He did not lift his arms toembrace them, he could not. His mother and sister clasped him in theirarms, kissed him, laughed and cried. He took a step, tottered and fellto the ground, fainting.

　　Anxiety, cries of horror, moans... Razumihin who was standing in thedoorway flew into the room, seized the sick man in his strong arms andin a moment had him on the sofa.

　　"It's nothing, nothing!" he cried to the mother and sister- "it'sonly a faint, a mere trifle! Only just now the doctor said he was muchbetter, that he is perfectly well! Water! See, he is coming tohimself, he is all right again!"

　　And seizing Dounia by the arm so that he almost dislocated it, hemade her bend down to see that "he is all right again." The mother andsister looked on him with emotion and gratitude, as theirProvidence. They had heard already from Nastasya all that had beendone for their Rodya during his illness, by this "very competent youngman," as Pulcheria Alexandrovna Raskolnikov called him that evening inconversation with Dounia.

　　PART THREE

　　Chapter One

　　RASKOLNIKOV got up, and sat down on the sofa. He waved his handweakly to Razumihin to cut short the flow of warm and incoherentconsolations he was addressing to his mother and sister, took themboth by the hand and for a minute or two gazed from one to the otherwithout speaking. His mother was alarmed by his expression. Itrevealed an emotion agonisingly poignant, and at the same timesomething immovable, almost insane. Pulcheria Alexandrovna began tocry.

　　Avdotya Romanovna was pale; her hand trembled in her brother's.

　　"Go home... with him," he said in a broken voice, pointing toRazumihin, "good-bye till to-morrow; to-morrow everything... Is itlong since you arrived?"

　　"This evening, Rodya," answered Pulcheria Alexandrovna, "the trainwas awfully late. But, Rodya, nothing would induce me to leave younow! I will spend the night here, near you..."

　　"Don't torture me!" he said with a gesture of irritation.

　　"I will stay with him," cried Razumihin, "I won't leave him for amoment. Bother all my visitors! Let them rage to their hearts'content! My uncle is presiding there."

　　"How, how can I thank you!" Pulcheria Alexandrovna was beginning,once more pressing Razumihin's hands, but Raskolnikov interruptedher again.

　　"I can't have it! I can't have it!" he repeated irritably, "don'tworry me! Enough, go away... I can't stand it!"

　　"Come, mamma, come out of the room at least for a minute," Douniawhispered in dismay; "we are distressing him, that's evident."

　　"Mayn't I look at him after three years?" wept PulcheriaAlexandrovna.

　　"Stay," he stopped them again, "you keep interrupting me, and myideas get muddled.... Have you seen Luzhin?"

　　"No, Rodya, but he knows already of our arrival. We have heard,Rodya, that Pyotr Petrovitch was so kind as to visit you today,"Pulcheria Alexandrovna added somewhat timidly.

　　"Yes... he was so kind... Dounia, I promised Luzhin I'd throw himdownstairs and told him to go to hell...."

　　"Rodya, what are you saying! Surely, you don't mean to tell us..."Pulcheria Alexandrovna began in alarm, but she stopped, looking atDounia.

　　Avdotya Romanovna was looking attentively at her brother, waitingfor what would come next. Both of them had heard of the quarrel fromNastasya, so far as she had succeeded in understanding and reportingit, and were in painful perplexity and suspense.

　　"Dounia," Raskolnikov continued with an effort, "I don't want thatmarriage, so at the first opportunity to-morrow you must refuseLuzhin, so that we may never hear his name again."

　　"Good Heavens!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　"Brother, think what you are saying!" Avdotya Romanovna beganimpetuously, but immediately checked herself. "You are not fit to talknow, perhaps; you are tired," she added gently.

　　"You think I am delirious? No... You are marrying Luzhin for mysake. But I won't accept the sacrifice. And so write a letter beforeto-morrow, to refuse him... Let me read it in the morning and thatwill be the end of it!"

　　"That I can't do!" the girl cried, offended, "what right haveyou..."

　　"Dounia, you are hasty, too, be quiet, to-morrow... Don't yousee..." the mother interposed in dismay. "Better come away!"

　　"He is raving," Razumihin cried tipsily, "or how would he dare!To-morrow all this nonsense will be over... to-day he certainly diddrive him away. That was so. And Luzhin got angry, too... He madespeeches here, wanted to show off his learning and he went outcrest-fallen...."

　　"Then it's true?" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　"Good-bye till to-morrow, brother," said Dounia compassionately-"let us go, mother... Good-bye, Rodya."

　　"Do you hear, sister," he repeated after them, making a last effort,"I am not delirious; this marriage is- an infamy. Let me act like ascoundrel, but you mustn't... one is enough... and though I am ascoundrel, I wouldn't own such a sister. It's me or Luzhin! Gonow...."

　　"But you're out of your mind! Despot!" roared Razumihin; butRaskolnikov did not and perhaps could not answer. He lay down on thesofa, and turned to the wall, utterly exhausted. Avdotya Romanovnalooked with interest at Razumihin; her black eyes flashed; Razumihinpositively started at her glance.

　　Pulcheria Alexandrovna stood overwhelmed.

　　"Nothing would induce me to go," she whispered in despair toRazumihin. "I will stay somewhere here... escort Dounia home."

　　"You'll spoil everything," Razumihin answered in the same whisper,losing patience- "come out on to the stairs, anyway. Nastasya, showa light! I assure you," he went on in a half whisper on the stairs-"that he was almost beating the doctor and me this afternoon! Do youunderstand? The doctor himself! Even he gave way and left him, so asnot to irritate him. I remained downstairs on guard, but he dressed atonce and slipped off. And he will slip off again if you irritatehim, at this time of night, and will do himself some mischief...."

　　"What are you saying?"

　　"And Avdotya Romanovna can't possibly be left in those lodgingswithout you. Just think where you are staying! That blackguard PyotrPetrovitch couldn't find you better lodgings... But you know I'vehad a little to drink, and that's what makes me... swear; don't mindit...."

　　"But I'll go to the landlady here," Pulcheria Alexandrovna insisted,"Ill beseech her to find some corner for Dounia and me for thenight. I can't leave him like that, I cannot!"

　　This conversation took place on the landing just before thelandlady's door. Nastasya lighted them from a step below. Razumihinwas in extraordinary excitement. Half an hour earlier, while he wasbringing Raskolnikov home, he had indeed talked too freely, but he wasaware of it himself, and his head was clear in spite of the vastquantities he had imbibed. Now he was in a state bordering on ecstasy,and all that he had drunk seemed to fly to his head with redoubledeffect. He stood with the two ladies, seizing both by their hands,persuading them, and giving them reasons with astonishing plainness ofspeech, and at almost every word he uttered, probably to emphasize hisarguments, he squeezed their hands painfully as in a vise. He staredat Avdotya Romanovna without the least regard for good manners. Theysometimes pulled their hands out of his huge bony paws, but far fromnoticing what was the matter, he drew them all the closer to him. Ifthey'd told him to jump head foremost from the staircase, he wouldhave done it without thought or hesitation in their service. ThoughPulcheria Alexandrovna felt that the young man was really tooeccentric and pinched her hand too much, in her anxiety over her Rodyashe looked on his presence as providential and was unwilling to noticeall his peculiarities. But though Avdotya Romanovna shared heranxiety, and was not of timorous disposition, she could not see theglowing light in his eyes without wonder and almost alarm. It was onlythe unbounded confidence inspired by Nastasya's account of herbrother's queer friend, which prevented her from trying to run awayfrom him, and to persuade her mother to do the same. She realised,too, that even running away was perhaps impossible now. Ten minuteslater, however, she was considerably reassured; it wascharacteristic of Razumihin that he showed his true nature at once,whatever mood he might be in, so that people quickly saw the sort ofman they had to deal with.

　　"You can't go to the landlady, that's perfect nonsense!" he cried."If you stay, though you are his mother, you'll drive him to a frenzy,and then goodness knows what will happen! Listen, I'll tell you whatI'll do: Nastasya will stay with him now, and I'll conduct you bothhome, you can't be in the streets alone; Petersburg is an awfulplace in that way... But no matter! Then I'll run straight back hereand a quarter of an hour later, on my word of honour, I'll bring younews how he is, whether he is asleep, and all that. Then, listen! ThenI'll run home in a twinkling- I've a lot of friends there, alldrunk- I'll fetch Zossimov- that's the doctor who is looking afterhim, he is there, too, but he is not drunk; he is not drunk, he isnever drunk! I'll drag him to Rodya, and then to you, so that you'llget two reports in the hour- from the doctor, you understand, from thedoctor himself, that's a very different thing from my account ofhim! If there's anything wrong, I swear I'll bring you here myself,but, if it's all right, you go to bed. And I'll spend the nighthere, in the passage, he won't hear me, and I'll tell Zossimov tosleep at the landlady's, to be at hand. Which is better for him: youor the doctor? So come home then! But the landlady is out of thequestion; it's all right for me, but it's out of the question for you:she wouldn't take you, for she's... for she's a fool... She'd bejealous on my account of Avdotya Romanovna and of you, too, if youwant to know... of Avdotya Romanovna certainly. She is anabsolutely, absolutely unaccountable character! But I am a fool,too!... No matter! Come along! Do you trust me? Come, do you trustme or not?"

　　"Let us go, mother," said Avdotya Romanovna, "he will certainly dowhat he has promised. He has saved Rodya already, and if the doctorreally will consent to spend the night here, what could be better?"

　　"You see, you... you... understand me, because you are an angel!"Razumihin cried in ecstasy, "let us go! Nastasya! Fly upstairs and sitwith him with a light; I'll come in a quarter of an hour."

　　Though Pulcheria Alexandrovna was not perfectly convinced, shemade no further resistance. Razumihin gave an arm to each and drewthem down the stairs. He still made her uneasy, as though he wascompetent and good-natured, was he capable of carrying out hispromise? He seemed in such a condition....

　　"Ah, I see you think I am in such a condition!" Razumihin broke inupon her thoughts, guessing them, as he strolled along the pavementwith huge steps, so that the two ladies could hardly keep up with him,a fact he did not observe, however. "Nonsense! That is... I am drunklike a fool, but that's not it; I am not drunk from wine. It'sseeing you has turned my head... But don't mind me! Don't take anynotice: I am talking nonsense, I am not worthy of you... I amutterly unworthy of you! The minute I've taken you home, I'll pour acouple of pailfuls of water over my head in the gutter here, andthen I shall be all right... If only you knew how I love you both!Don't laugh, and don't be angry! You may be angry with any one, butnot with me! I am his friend, and therefore I am your friend, too, Iwant to be... I had a presentiment... Last year there was amoment... though it wasn't a presentiment really, for you seem to havefallen from heaven. And I expect I shan't sleep all night...Zossimov was afraid a little time ago that he would go mad... that'swhy he mustn't be irritated."

　　"What do you say?" cried the mother.

　　"Did the doctor really say that?" asked Avdotya Romanovna, alarmed.

　　"Yes, but it's not so, not a bit of it. He gave him some medicine, apowder, I saw it, and then your coming here.... Ah! It would have beenbetter if you had come to-morrow. It's a good thing we went away.And in an hour Zossimov himself will report to you about everything.He is not drunk! And I shan't be drunk... And what made me get sotight? Because they got me into an argument, damn them! I've swornnever to argue! They talk such trash! I almost came to blows! I'veleft my uncle to preside. Would you believe, they insist on completeabsence of individualism and that's just what they relish! Not to bethemselves, to be as unlike themselves as they can. That's what theyregard as the highest point of progress. If only their nonsense weretheir own, but as it is..."

　　"Listen!" Pulcheria Alexandrovna interrupted timidly, but it onlyadded fuel to the flames.

　　"What do you think?" shouted Razumihin, louder than ever, "you thinkI am attacking them for talking nonsense? Not a bit! I like them totalk nonsense. That's man's one privilege over all creation. Througherror you come to the truth! I am a man because I err! You never reachany truth without making fourteen mistakes and very likely a hundredand fourteen. And a fine thing, too, in its way; but we can't evenmake mistakes on our own account! Talk nonsense, but talk your ownnonsense, and I'll kiss you for it. To go wrong in one's own way isbetter than to go right in some one else's. In the first case youare a man, in the second you're no better than a bird. Truth won'tescape you, but life can be cramped. There have been examples. Andwhat are we doing now? In science, development, thought, invention,ideals, aims, liberalism, judgment, experience and everything,everything, everything, we are still in the preparatory class atschool. We prefer to live on other people's ideas, it's what we areused to! Am I right, am I right?" cried Razumihin, pressing andshaking the two ladies' hands.

　　"Oh, mercy, I do not know," cried poor Pulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　"Yes, yes... though I don't agree with you in everything," addedAvdotya Romanovna earnestly and at once uttered a cry, for he squeezedher hand so painfully.

　　"Yes, you say yes... well after that you... you..." he cried in atransport, "you are a fount of goodness, purity, sense... andperfection. Give me your hand... you give me yours, too! I want tokiss your hands here at once, on my knees..." and he fell on his kneeson the pavement, fortunately at that time deserted.

　　"Leave off, I entreat you, what are you doing?" PulcheriaAlexandrovna cried, greatly distressed.

　　"Get up, get up!" said Dounia laughing, though she, too, was upset.

　　"Not for anything till you let me kiss your hands! That's it!Enough! I get up and we'll go on! I am a luckless fool, I amunworthy of you and drunk... and I am ashamed.... I am not worthy tolove you, but to do homage to you is the duty of every man who isnot a perfect beast! And I've done homage.... Here are yourlodgings, and for that alone Rodya was right in driving your PyotrPetrovitch away.... How dare he! how dare he put you in such lodgings!It's a scandal! Do you know the sort of people they take in here?And you his betrothed! You are his betrothed? Yes, well, then, I'lltell you, your fiance is a scoundrel."

　　"Excuse me, Mr. Razumihin, you are forgetting..." PulcheriaAlexandrovna was beginning.

　　"Yes, yes, you are right, I did forget myself, I am ashamed ofit," Razumihin made haste to apologise. "But... but you can't be angrywith me for speaking so! For I speak sincerely and not because...hm, hm! That would be disgraceful; in fact not because I'm in... hm!Well, anyway I won't say why, I daren't.... But we all saw to-day whenhe came in that that man is not of our sort. Not because he had hishair curled at the barber's, not because he was in such a hurry toshow his wit, but because he is a spy, a speculator, because he is askin-flint and a buffoon. That's evident. Do you think him clever? No,he is a fool, a fool. And is he a match for you? Good heavens! Doyou see, ladies?" he stopped suddenly on the way upstairs to theirrooms, "though all my friends there are drunk, yet they are allhonest, and though we do talk a lot of trash, and I do, too, yet weshall talk our way to the truth at last, for we are on the right path,while Pyotr Petrovitch... is not on the right path. Though I've beencalling them all sorts of names just now, I do respect them all...though I don't respect Zametov, I like him, for he is a puppy, andthat bullock Zossimov, because he is an honest man and knows his work.But enough, it's all said and forgiven. Is it forgiven? Well, then,let's go on. I know this corridor, I've been here, there was a scandalhere at Number 3.... Where are you here? Which number? eight? Well,lock yourselves in for the night, then. Don't let anybody in. In aquarter of an hour I'll come back with news, and half an hour laterI'll bring Zossimov, you'll see! Good-bye, I'll run."

　　"Good heavens, Dounia, what is going to happen?" said PulcheriaAlexandrovna, addressing her daughter with anxiety and dismay.

　　"Don't worry yourself, mother," said Dounia, taking off her hatand cape. "God has sent this gentleman to our aid, though he hascome from a drinking party. We can depend on him, I assure you. Andall that he has done for Rodya...."

　　"Ah. Dounia, goodness knows whether he will come! How could Ibring myself to leave Rodya?... And how different, how different I hadfancied our meeting! How sullen he was, as though not pleased to seeus...."

　　Tears came into her eyes.

　　"No, it's not that, mother. You didn't see, you were crying allthe time. He is quite unhinged by serious illness- that's the reason."

　　"Ah, that illness! What will happen, what will happen? And how hetalked to you, Dounia!" said the mother, looking timidly at herdaughter, trying to read her thoughts and, already half consoled byDounia's standing up for her brother, which meant that she had alreadyforgiven him. "I am sure he will think better of it to-morrow," sheadded, probing her further.

　　"And I am sure that he will say the same to-morrow... about that,"Avdotya Romanovna said finally. And, of course, there was no goingbeyond that, for this was a point which Pulcheria Alexandrovna wasafraid to discuss. Dounia went up and kissed her mother. The latterwarmly embraced her without speaking. Then she sat down to waitanxiously for Razumihin's return, timidly watching her daughter whowalked up and down the room with her arms folded, lost in thought.This walking up and down when she was thinking was a habit ofAvdotya Romanovna's and the mother was always afraid to break in onher daughter's mood at such moments.

　　Razumihin, of course, was ridiculous in his sudden drunkeninfatuation for Avdotya Romanovna. Yet apart from his eccentriccondition, many people would have thought it justified if they hadseen Avdotya Romanovna, especially at that moment when she was walkingto and fro with folded arms, pensive and melancholy. Avdotya Romanovnawas remarkably good looking; she was tall, strikinglywell-proportioned, strong and self-reliant- the latter quality wasapparent in every gesture, though it did not in the least detract fromthe grace and softness of her movements. In face she resembled herbrother, but she might be described as really beautiful. Her hairwas dark brown, a little lighter than her brother's; there was a proudlight in her almost black eyes and yet at times a look ofextraordinary kindness. She was pale, but it was a healthy pallor; herface was radiant with freshness and vigour. Her mouth was rathersmall; the full red lower lip projected a little as did her chin; itwas the only irregularity in her beautiful face, but it gave it apeculiarly individual and almost haughty expression. Her face wasalways more serious and thoughtful than gay; but how well smiles,how well youthful, lighthearted, irresponsible, laughter suited herface! It was natural enough that a warm, open, simple-hearted,honest giant like Razumihin, who had never seen any one like her andwas not quite sober at the time, should lose his head immediately.Besides, as chance would have it, he saw Dounia for the first timetransfigured by her love for her brother and her joy at meeting him.Afterwards he saw her lower lip quiver with indignation at herbrother's insolent, cruel and ungrateful words- and his fate wassealed.

　　He had spoken the truth, moreover, when he blurted out in hisdrunken talk on the stairs that Praskovya Pavlovna, Raskolnikov'seccentric landlady, would be jealous of Pulcheria Alexandrovna as wellas of Avdotya Romanovna on his account. Although PulcheriaAlexandrovna was forty-three, her face still retained traces of herformer beauty; she looked much younger than her age, indeed, whichis almost always the case with women who retain serenity of spirit,sensitiveness and pure sincere warmth of heart to old age. We mayadd in parenthesis that to preserve all this is the only means ofretaining beauty to old age. Her hair had begun to grow grey and thin,there had long been little crow's foot wrinkles round her eyes, hercheeks were hollow and sunken from anxiety and grief, and yet it was ahandsome face. She was Dounia over again, twenty years older, butwithout the projecting underlip. Pulcheria Alexandrovna was emotional,but not sentimental, timid and yielding, but only to a certainpoint. She could give way and accept a great deal even of what wascontrary to her convictions, but there was a certain barrier fixedby honesty, principle and the deepest convictions which nothingwould induce her to cross.

　　Exactly twenty minutes after Razumihin's departure, there came twosubdued but hurried knocks at the door: he had come back.

　　"I won't come in, I haven't time," he hastened to say when thedoor was opened. "He sleeps like a top, soundly, quietly, and Godgrant he may sleep ten hours. Nastasya's with him; I told her not toleave till I came. Now I am fetching Zossimov, he will report to youand then you'd better turn in; I can see you are too tired to doanything...."

　　And he ran off down the corridor.

　　"What a very competent and... devoted young man!" cried PulcheriaAlexandrovna exceedingly delighted.

　　"He seems a splendid person!" Avdotya Romanovna replied with somewarmth, resuming her walk up and down the room.

　　It was nearly an hour later when they heard footsteps in thecorridor and another knock at the door. Both women waited this timecompletely relying on Razumihin's promise; he actually had succeededin bringing Zossimov. Zossimov had agreed at once to desert thedrinking party to go to Raskolnikov's, but he came reluctantly andwith the greatest suspicion to see the ladies, mistrusting Razumihinin his exhilarated condition. But his vanity was at once reassured andflattered; he saw that they were really expecting him as an oracle. Hestayed just ten minutes and succeeded in completely convincing andcomforting Pulcheria Alexandrovna. He spoke with marked sympathy,but with the reserve and extreme seriousness of a young doctor at animportant consultation. He did not utter a word on any other subjectand did not display the slightest desire to enter into more personalrelations with the two ladies. Remarking at his first entrance thedazzling beauty of Avdotya Romanovna, he endeavoured not to notice herat all during his visit and addressed himself solely to PulcheriaAlexandrovna. All this gave him extraordinary inward satisfaction.He declared that he thought the invalid at this moment going on verysatisfactorily. According to his observations the patient's illnesswas due partly to his unfortunate material surroundings during thelast few months, but it had partly also a moral origin, "was so tospeak the product of several material and moral influences, anxieties,apprehensions, troubles, certain ideas... and so on." Noticingstealthily that Avdotya Romanovna was following his words with closeattention, Zossimov allowed himself to enlarge on this theme. OnPulcheria Alexandrovna's anxiously and timidly inquiring as to "somesuspicion of insanity," he replied with a composed and candid smilethat his words had been exaggerated; that certainly the patient hadsome fixed idea, something approaching a monomania- he, Zossimov,was now particularly studying this interesting branch of medicine- butthat it must be recollected that until to-day the patient had beenin delirium and... and that no doubt the presence of his familywould have a favourable effect on his recovery and distract hismind, "if only all fresh shocks can be avoided," he addedsignificantly. Then he got up, took leave with an impressive andaffable bow, while blessings, warm gratitude, and entreaties wereshowered upon him, and Avdotya Romanovna spontaneously offered herhand to him. He went out exceedingly pleased with his visit andstill more so with himself.

　　"We'll talk to-morrow; go to bed at once!" Razumihin said inconclusion, following Zossimov out. "I'll be with you to-morrowmorning as early as possible with my report."

　　"That's a fetching little girl, Avdotya Romanovna," remarkedZossimov, almost licking his lips as they both came out into thestreet.

　　"Fetching? You said fetching?" roared Razumihin and he flew atZossimov and seized him by the throat. "If you ever dare... Do youunderstand? Do you understand?" he shouted, shaking him by thecollar and squeezing him against the wall. "Do you hear?"

　　"Let me go, you drunken devil," said Zossimov, struggling and whenhe had let him go, he stared at him and went off into a sudden guffaw.Razumihin stood facing him in gloomy and earnest reflection.

　　"Of course, I am an ass," he observed, sombre as a storm cloud, "butstill... you are another."

　　"No, brother, not at all such another. I am not dreaming of anyfolly."

　　They walked along in silence and only when they were close toRaskolnikov's lodgings, Razumihin broke the silence in considerableanxiety.

　　"Listen," he said, "you're a first-rate fellow, but among your otherfailings, you're a loose fish, that, I know, and a dirty one, too. Youare a feeble, nervous wretch, and a mass of whims, you're gettingfat and lazy and can't deny yourself anything- and I call that dirtybecause it leads on straight into the dirt. You've let yourself get soslack that I don't know how it is you are still a good, even a devoteddoctor. You- a doctor- sleep on a feather bed and get up at night toyour patients! In another three or four years you won't get up foryour patients... But hang it all, that's not the point!... You aregoing to spend to-night in the landlady's flat here. (Hard work I'vehad to persuade her!) And I'll be in the kitchen. So here's a chancefor you to get to know her better.... It's not as you think! There'snot a trace of anything of the sort, brother...!"

　　"But I don't think!"

　　"Here you have modesty, brother, silence, bashfulness, a savagevirtue... and yet she's sighing and melting like wax, simplymelting! Save me from her, by all that's unholy! She's mostprepossessing... I'll repay you, I'll do anything...."

　　Zossimov laughed more violently than ever.

　　"Well, you are smitten! But what am I to do with her?"

　　"It won't be much trouble, I assure you. Talk any rot you like toher, as long as you sit by her and talk. You're a doctor, too; trycuring her of something. I swear you won't regret it. She has a piano,and you know, I strum a little. I have a song there, a genuine Russianone: 'I shed hot tears.' She likes the genuine article- and well, itall began with that song; Now you're a regular performer, a maitre,a Rubinstein.... I assure you, you won't regret it!"

　　"But have you made her some promise? Something signed? A promiseof marriage, perhaps?"

　　"Nothing, nothing, absolutely nothing of the kind! Besides she isnot that sort at all.... Tchebarov tried that...."

　　"Well, then, drop her!"

　　"But I can't drop her like that!"

　　"Why can't you?"

　　"Well, I can't, that's all about it! There's an element ofattraction here, brother."

　　"Then why have you fascinated her?"

　　"I haven't fascinated her; perhaps, I was fascinated myself in myfolly. But she won't care a straw whether it's you or I, so long assomebody sits beside her, sighing.... I can't explain the position,brother... look here, you are good at mathematics, and working at itnow... begin teaching her the integral calculus; upon my soul, I'm notjoking. I'm in earnest, it'll be just the same to her. She will gazeat you and sigh for a whole year together. I talked to her once fortwo days at a time about the Prussian House of Lords (for one musttalk of something)- she just sighed and perspired! And you mustn'ttalk of love- she's bashful to hysterics- but just let her see youcan't tear yourself away- that's enough. It's fearfully comfortable;you're quite at home, you can read, sit, lie about, write. You mayeven venture on a kiss, if you're careful."

　　"But what do I want with her?"

　　"Ach, I can't make you understand! You see, you are made for eachother! I have often been reminded of you!... You'll come to it inthe end! So does it matter whether it's sooner or later? There's thefeatherbed element here, brother,- ach! and not only that! There'san attraction here- here you have the end of the world, ananchorage, a quiet haven, the navel of the earth, the three fishesthat are the foundation of the world, the essence of pancakes, ofsavoury fish-pies, of the evening samovar, of soft sighs and warmshawls, and hot stoves to sleep on- as snug as though you were dead,and yet you're alive- the advantages of both at once! Well, hang it,brother, what stuff I'm talking, it's bedtime! Listen. I sometimeswake up at night; so I'll go in and look at him. But there's noneed, it's all right. Don't you worry yourself, yet if you like, youmight just look in once, too. But if you notice anything, deliriumor fever- wake me at once. But there can't be...."

　　Chapter Two

　　RAZUMIHIN waked up next morning at eight o'clock, troubled andserious. He found himself confronted with many new and unlooked-forperplexities. He had never expected that he would ever wake up feelinglike that. He remembered every detail of the previous day and heknew that a perfectly novel experience had befallen him, that he hadreceived an impression unlike anything he had known before. At thesame time he recognised clearly that the dream which had fired hisimagination was hopelessly unattainable- so unattainable that hefelt positively ashamed of it, and he hastened to pass to the othermore practical cares and difficulties bequeathed him by that "thriceaccursed yesterday."

　　The most awful recollection of the previous day was the way he hadshown himself "base and mean," not only because he had been drunk, butbecause he had taken advantage of the young girl's position to abuseher fiance in his stupid jealousy, knowing nothing of their mutualrelations and obligations and next to nothing of the man himself.And what right had he to criticise him in that hasty and unguardedmanner? Who had asked for his opinion! Was it thinkable that such acreature as Avdotya Romanovna would be marrying an unworthy man formoney? So there must be something in him. The lodgings? But afterall how could he know the character of the lodgings? He was furnishinga flat... Foo, how despicable it all was! And what justification wasit that he was drunk? Such a stupid excuse was even more degrading! Inwine is truth, and the truth had all come out, "that is, all theuncleanness of his coarse and envious heart!" And would such a dreamever be permissible to him, Razumihin? What was he beside such a girl-he, the drunken noisy braggart of last night? "Was it possible toimagine so absurd and cynical a juxtaposition?" Razumihin blusheddesperately at the very idea and suddenly the recollection forceditself vividly upon him of how he had said last night on the stairsthat the landlady would be jealous of Avdotya Romanovna... that wassimply intolerable. He brought his fist down heavily on the kitchenstove, hurt his hand and sent one of the bricks flying.

　　"Of course," he muttered to himself a minute later with a feeling ofself-abasement, "of course, all these infamies can never be wipedout or smoothed over... and so it's useless even to think of it, and Imust go to them in silence and do my duty... in silence, too.... andnot ask forgiveness, and say nothing... for all is lost now!"

　　And yet as he dressed he examined his attire more carefully thanusual. He hadn't another suit- if he had had, perhaps he wouldn't haveput it on. "I would have made a point of not putting it on." But inany case he could not remain a cynic and a dirty sloven; he had noright to offend the feelings of others, especially when they were inneed of his assistance and asking him to see them. He brushed hisclothes carefully. His linen was always decent; in that respect he wasespecially clean.

　　He washed that morning scrupulously- he got some soap from Nastasya-he washed his hair, his neck and especially his hands. When it came tothe question whether to shave his stubby chin or not (PraskovyaPavlovna had capital razors that had been left by her late husband),the question was angrily answered in the negative. "Let it stay asit is! What if they think that I shaved on purpose to...? Theycertainly  would think so! Not on any account!"

　　"And... the worst of it was he was so coarse, so dirty, he had themanners of a pothouse; and... and even admitting that he knew he hadsome of the essentials of a gentleman... what was there in that tobe proud of? Every one ought to be a gentleman and more than that...and all the same (he remembered) he, too, had done little things...not exactly dishonest, and yet.... and what thoughts he sometimes had;hm... and to set all that beside Avdotya Romanovna! Confound it! So beit! Well, he'd make a point then of being dirty, greasy, pothouse inhis manners and he wouldn't care! He'd be worse!"

　　He was engaged in such monologues when Zossimov, who had spent thenight in Praskovya Pavlovna's parlour, came in.

　　He was going home and was in a hurry to look at the invalid first.Razumihin informed him that Raskolnikov was sleeping like adormouse. Zossimov gave orders that they shouldn't wake him andpromised to see him again about eleven.

　　"If he is still at home," he added. "Damn it all! If one can'tcontrol one's patients, how is one to cure them! Do you know whetherhe will go to them, or whether they are coming here?"

　　"They are coming, I think," said Razumihin, understanding the objectof the question, "and they will discuss their family affairs, nodoubt. I'll be off. You, as the doctor, have more right to be herethan I."

　　"But I am not a father confessor; I shall come and go away; I'veplenty to do besides looking after them."

　　"One thing worries me," interposed Razumihin, frowning. "On theway home I talked a lot of drunken nonsense to him... all sort ofthings... and amongst them that you were afraid that he... mightbecome insane."

　　"You told the ladies so, too."

　　"I know it was stupid! You may beat me if you like! Did you think soseriously?"

　　"That's nonsense, I tell you, how could I think it seriously! You,yourself, described him as a monomaniac when you fetched me tohim... and we added fuel to the fire yesterday, you did, that is, withyour story about the painter; it was a nice conversation, when he was,perhaps, mad on that very point! If only I'd known what happenedthen at the police station and that some wretch... had insulted himwith this suspicion! Hm... I would not have allowed thatconversation yesterday. These monomaniacs will make a mountain outof a molehill... and see their fancies as solid realities.... As faras I remember, it was Zametov's story that cleared up half the mysteryto my mind. Why, I know one case in which a hypochondriac, a man offorty, cut the throat of a little boy of eight, because he couldn'tendure the jokes he made every day at table! And in this case hisrags, the insolent police officer, the fever and this suspicion! Allthat working upon a man half frantic with hypochondria, and with hismorbid exceptional vanity! That may well have been thestarting-point of illness. Well, bother it all!... And, by the way,that Zametov certainly is a nice fellow, but hm... he shouldn't havetold all that last night. He is an awful chatterbox!"

　　"But whom did he tell it to? You and me?"

　　"And Porfiry."

　　"What does that matter?"

　　"And, by the way, have you any influence on them, his mother andsister? Tell them to be more careful with him to-day...."

　　"They'll get on all right!" Razumihin answered reluctantly.

　　"Why is he so set against this Luzhin? A man with money and shedoesn't seem to dislike him... and they haven't a farthing Isuppose? eh?"

　　"But what business is it of yours?" Razumihin cried withannoyance. "How can I tell whether they've a farthing? Ask themyourself and perhaps you'll find out...."

　　"Foo, what an ass you are sometimes! Last night's wine has notgone off yet.... Good-bye; thank your Praskovya Pavlovna from me formy night's lodging. She locked herself in, made no reply to my bonjourthrough the door; she was up at seven o'clock, the samovar was takenin to her from the kitchen. I was not vouchsafed a personalinterview...."

　　At nine o'clock precisely Razumihin reached the lodgings atBakaleyev's house. Both ladies were waiting for him with nervousimpatience. They had risen at seven o'clock or earlier. He enteredlooking as black as night, bowed awkwardly and was at once furiouswith himself for it. He had reckoned without his host: PulcheriaAlexandrovna fairly rushed at him, seized him by both hands and wasalmost kissing them. He glanced timidly at Avdotya Romanovna, buther proud countenance wore at that moment an expression of suchgratitude and friendliness, such complete and unlooked-for respect (inplace of the sneering looks and ill-disguised contempt he hadexpected), that it threw him into greater confusion than if he hadbeen met with abuse. Fortunately there was a subject for conversation,and he made haste to snatch at it.

　　Hearing that everything was going well and that Rodya had not yetwaked, Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared that she was glad to hear it,because "she had something which it was very, very necessary to talkover beforehand." Then followed an inquiry about breakfast and aninvitation to have it with them; they had waited to have it withhim. Avdotya Romanovna rang the bell: it was answered by a raggeddirty waiter, and they asked him to bring tea which was served atlast, but in such a dirty and disorderly way, that the ladies wereashamed. Razumihin vigorously attacked the lodgings, but,remembering Luzhin, stopped in embarrassment and was greatlyrelieved by Pulcheria Alexandrovna's questions, which showered in acontinual stream upon him.

　　He talked for three quarters of an hour, being constantlyinterrupted by their questions, and succeeded in describing to themall the most important facts he knew of the last year of Raskolnikov'slife, concluding with a circumstantial account of his illness. Heomitted, however, many things, which were better omitted, includingthe scene at the police station with all its consequences. Theylistened eagerly to his story, and, when he thought he had finishedand satisfied his listeners, he found that they considered he hadhardly begun.

　　"Tell me, tell me! What do you think...? Excuse me, I still don'tknow your name!" Pulcheria Alexandrovna put in hastily.

　　"Dmitri Prokofitch."

　　"I should like very, very much to know, Dmitri Prokofitch... howhe looks... on things in general now, that is, how can I explain, whatare his likes and dislikes? Is he always so irritable? Tell me, if youcan, what are his hopes and so to say his dreams? Under whatinfluences is he now? In a word, I should like..."

　　"Ah, mother, how can he answer all that at once?" observed Dounia.

　　"Good heavens, I had not expected to find him in the least likethis, Dmitri Prokofitch!"

　　"Naturally," answered Razumihin. "I have no mother, but my unclecomes every year and almost every time he can scarcely recognise me,even in appearance, though he is a clever man; and your three years'separation means a great deal. What am I to tell you? I have knownRodion for a year and a half; he is morose, gloomy, proud and haughty,and of late- and perhaps for a long time before- he has beensuspicious and fanciful. He has a noble nature and a kind heart. Hedoes not like showing his feelings and would rather do a cruel thingthan open his heart freely. Sometimes, though, he is not at allmorbid, but simply cold and inhumanly callous; it's as though hewere alternating between two characters. Sometimes he is fearfullyreserved! He says he is so busy that everything is a hindrance, andyet he lies in bed doing nothing. He doesn't jeer at things, notbecause he hasn't the wit, but as though he hadn't time to waste onsuch trifles. He never listens to what is said to him. He is neverinterested in what interests other people at any given moment. Hethinks very highly of himself and perhaps he is right. Well, whatmore? I think your arrival will have a most beneficial influenceupon him."

　　"God grant it may," cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, distressed byRazumihin's account of her Rodya.

　　And Razumihin ventured to look more boldly at Avdotya Romanovna atlast. He glanced at her often while he was talking, but only for amoment and looked away again at once. Avdotya Romanovna sat at thetable, listening attentively, then got up again and began walking toand fro with her arms folded and her lips compressed, occasionallyputting in a question, without stopping her walk. She had the samehabit of not listening to what was said. She was wearing a dress ofthin dark stuff and she had a white transparent scarf round herneck. Razumihin soon detected signs of extreme poverty in theirbelongings. Had Avdotya Romanovna been dressed like a queen, he feltthat he would not be afraid of her, but perhaps just because she waspoorly dressed and that he noticed all the misery of her surroundings,his heart was filled with dread and he began to be afraid of everyword he uttered, every gesture he made, which was very trying for aman who already felt diffident.

　　"You've told us a great deal that is interesting about mybrother's character... and have told it impartially. I am glad. Ithought that you were too uncritically devoted to him," observedAvdotya Romanovna with a smile. "I think you are right that he needs awoman's care," she added thoughtfully.

　　"I didn't say so; but I daresay you are right, only..."

　　"What?"

　　"He loves no one and perhaps he never will," Razumihin declareddecisively.

　　"You mean he is not capable of love?"

　　"Do you know, Avdotya Romanovna, you are awfully like yourbrother, in everything, indeed!" he blurted out suddenly to his ownsurprise, but remembering at once what he had just before said ofher brother, he turned as red as a crab and was overcome withconfusion. Avdotya Romanovna couldn't help laughing when she looked athim.

　　"You may both be mistaken about Rodya," Pulcheria Alexandrovnaremarked, slightly piqued. "I am not talking of our presentdifficulty, Dounia. What Pyotr Petrovitch writes in this letter andwhat you and I have supposed may be mistaken, but you can't imagine,Dmitri Prokofitch, how moody and, so to say, capricious he is. I nevercould depend on what he would do when he was only fifteen. And I amsure that he might do something now that nobody else would think ofdoing... Well, for instance, do you know how a year and a half agohe astounded me and gave me a shock that nearly killed me, when he hadthe idea of marrying that girl- what was her name- his landlady'sdaughter?"

　　"Did you hear about that affair?" asked Avdotya Romanovna.

　　"Do you suppose-" Pulcheria Alexandrovna continued warmly. "Do yousuppose that my tears, my entreaties, my illness, my possible deathfrom grief, our poverty would have made him pause? No, he would calmlyhave disregarded all obstacles. And yet it isn't that he doesn'tlove us!"

　　"He has never spoken a word of that affair to me," Razumihinanswered cautiously. "But I did hear something from Praskovya Pavlovnaherself, though she is by no means a gossip. And what I heardcertainly was rather strange."

　　"And what did you hear?" both the ladies asked at once.

　　"Well, nothing very special. I only learned that the marriage, whichonly failed to take place through the girl's death, was not at allto Praskovya Pavlovna's liking. They say, too, the girl was not at allpretty, in fact I am told positively ugly... and such an invalid...and queer. But she seems to have had some good qualities. She musthave had some good qualities or it's quite inexplicable.... She had nomoney either and he wouldn't have considered her money.... But it'salways difficult to judge in such matters."

　　"I am sure she was a good girl," Avdotya Romanovna observed briefly.

　　"God forgive me, I simply rejoiced at her death. Though I don't knowwhich of them would have caused most misery to the other- he to her orshe to him," Pulcheria Alexandrovna concluded. Then she begantentatively questioning him about the scene on the previous day withLuzhin, hesitating and continually glancing at Dounia, obviously tothe latter's annoyance. This incident more than all the rest evidentlycaused her uneasiness, even consternation. Razumihin described it indetail again, but this time he added his own conclusions: he openlyblamed Raskolnikov for intentionally insulting Pyotr Petrovitch, notseeking to excuse him on the score of his illness.

　　"He had planned it before his illness," he added.

　　"I think so, too," Pulcheria Alexandrovna agreed with a dejectedair. But she was very much surprised at hearing Razumihin expresshimself so carefully and even with a certain respect about PyotrPetrovitch. Avdotya Romanovna, too, was struck by it.

　　"So this is your opinion of Pyotr Petrovitch?" PulcheriaAlexandrovna could not resist asking.

　　"I can have no other opinion of your daughter's future husband,"Razumihin answered firmly and with warmth, "and I don't say itsimply from vulgar politeness, but because... simply because AvdotyaRomanovna has of her own free will deigned to accept this man. If Ispoke so rudely of him last night, it was because I was disgustinglydrunk and... mad besides; yes, mad, crazy, I lost my headcompletely... and this morning I am ashamed of it."

　　He crimsoned and ceased speaking. Avdotya Romanovna flushed, but didnot break the silence. She had not uttered a word from the moment theybegan to speak of Luzhin.

　　Without her support Pulcheria Alexandrovna obviously did not knowwhat to do. At last, faltering and continually glancing at herdaughter, she confessed that she was exceedingly worried by onecircumstance.

　　"You see, Dmitri Prokofitch," she began. "I'll be perfectly openwith Dmitri Prokofitch, Dounia?"

　　"Of course, mother," said Avdotya Romanovna emphatically.

　　"This is what it is," she began in haste, as though the permissionto speak of her trouble lifted a weight off her mind. "Very early thismorning we got a note from Pyotr Petrovitch in reply to our letterannouncing our arrival. He promised to meet us at the station, youknow; instead of that he sent a servant to bring us the address ofthese lodgings and to show us the way; and he sent a message that hewould be here himself this morning. But this morning this note camefrom him. You'd better read it yourself; there is one point in itwhich worries me very much... you will soon see what that is, and...tell me your candid opinion, Dmitri Prokofitch! You know Rodya'scharacter better than any one and no one can advise us better than youcan. Dounia, I must tell you, made her decision at once, but I stilldon't feel sure how to act and I... I've been waiting for youropinion."

　　Razumihin opened the note which was dated the previous evening andread as follows:-

　　"DEAR MADAM, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, I have the honour to inform youthat owing to unforeseen obstacles I was rendered unable to meet youat the railway station; I sent a very competent person with the sameobject in view. I likewise shall be deprived of the honour of aninterview with you to-morrow morning by business in the Senate thatdoes not admit of delay, and also that I may not intrude on yourfamily circle while you are meeting your son, and Avdotya Romanovnaher brother. I shall have the honour of visiting you and paying you myrespects at your lodgings not later than to-morrow evening at eighto'clock precisely, and herewith I venture to present my earnest and, Imay add, imperative request that Rodion Romanovitch may not be presentat our interview- as he offered me a gross and unprecedented affronton the occasion of my visit to him in his illness yesterday, and,moreover, since I desire from you personally an indispensable andcircumstantial explanation upon a certain point, in regard to whichI wish to learn your own interpretation. I have the honour to informyou, in anticipation, that if, in spite of my request, I meet RodionRomanovitch, I shall be compelled to withdraw immediately and then youhave only yourself to blame. I write on the assumption that RodionRomanovitch who appeared so ill at my visit, suddenly recovered twohours later and so, being able to leave the house, may visit you also.I was confirmed in that belief by the testimony of my own eyes inthe lodging of a drunken man who was run over and has since died, towhose daughter, a young woman of notorious behaviour, he gavetwenty-five roubles on the pretext of the funeral, which gravelysurprised me knowing what pains you were at to raise that sum.Herewith expressing my special respect to your estimable daughter,Avdotya Romanovna, I beg you to accept the respectful homage of

　　"Your humble servant,

　　"P. LUZHIN."-

　　"What am I to do now, Dmitri Prokofitch?" began PulcheriaAlexandrovna, almost weeping. "How can I ask Rodya not to come?Yesterday he insisted so earnestly on our refusing Pyotr Petrovitchand now we are ordered not to receive Rodya! He will come on purposeif he knows, and... what will happen then?"

　　"Act on Avdotya Romanovna's decision," Razumihin answered calmlyat once.

　　"Oh, dear me! She says... goodness knows what she says, shedoesn't explain her object! She says that it would be best, atleast, not that it would be best, but that it's absolutely necessarythat Rodya should make a point of being here at eight o'clock and thatthey must meet.... I didn't want even to show him the letter, but toprevent him from coming by some stratagem with your help... because heis so irritable.... Besides I don't understand about that drunkard whodied and that daughter, and how he could have given the daughter allthe money... which..."

　　"Which cost you such sacrifice, mother," put in Avdotya Romanovna.

　　"He was not himself yesterday," Razumihin said thoughtfully, "if youonly knew what he was up to in a restaurant yesterday, though therewas sense in it too.... Hm! He did say something, as we were goinghome yesterday evening, about a dead man and a girl, but I didn'tunderstand a word.... But last night, I myself..."

　　"The best thing, mother, will be for us to go to him ourselves andthere I assure you we shall see at once what's to be done. Besides,it's getting late- good heavens, it's past ten," she cried lookingat a splendid gold enamelled watch which hung round her neck on a thinVenetian chain, and looked entirely out of keeping with the rest ofher dress. "A present from her fiance," thought Razumihin.

　　"We must start, Dounia, we must start," her mother cried in aflutter. "He will be thinking we are still angry after yesterday, fromour coming so late. Merciful heavens!"

　　While she said this she was hurriedly putting on her hat and mantle;Dounia, too, put on her things. Her gloves, as Razumihin noticed, werenot merely shabby but had holes in them, and yet this evidentpoverty gave the two ladies an air of special dignity, which is alwaysfound in people who know how to wear poor clothes. Razumihin lookedreverently at Dounia and felt proud of escorting her. "The queen whomended her stockings in prison," he thought, "must have looked thenevery inch a queen and even more a queen than at sumptuous banquetsand levees."

　　"My God," exclaimed Pulcheria Alexandrovna, "little did I think thatI should ever fear seeing my son, my darling, darling Rodya! I amafraid, Dmitri Prokofitch," she added, glancing at him timidly.

　　"Don't be afraid, mother," said Dounia, kissing her, "better havefaith in him."

　　"Oh, dear, I have faith in him, but I haven't slept all night,"exclaimed the poor woman.

　　They came out into the street.

　　"Do you know, Dounia, when I dozed a little this morning I dreamedof Marfa Petrovna... she was all in white... she came up to me, tookmy hand, and shook her head at me, but so sternly as though she wereblaming me.... Is that a good omen? Oh, dear me! You don't know,Dmitri Prokofitch, that Marfa Petrovna's dead!"

　　"No, I didn't know; who is Marfa Petrovna?"

　　"She died suddenly; and only fancy..."

　　"Afterwards, mamma," put in Dounia. "He doesn't know who MarfaPetrovna is."

　　"Ah, you don't know? And I was thinking that you knew all aboutus. Forgive me, Dmitri Prokofitch, I don't know what I am thinkingabout these last few days. I look upon you really as a providencefor us, and so I took it for granted that you knew all about us. Ilook on you as a relation.... Don't be angry with me for saying so.Dear me, what's the matter with your right hand? Have you knocked it?"

　　"Yes, I bruised it," muttered Razumihin overjoyed.

　　"I sometimes speak too much from the heart, so that Dounia findsfault with me.... But, dear me, what a cupboard he lives in! Iwonder whether he is awake? Does this woman, his landlady, consider ita room? Listen, you say he does not like to show his feelings, soperhaps I shall annoy him with my... weaknesses? Do advise me,Dmitri Prokofitch, how am I to treat him? I feel quite distracted, youknow."

　　"Don't question him too much about anything if you see him frown!don't ask him too much about his health; he doesn't like that."

　　"Ah, Dmitri Prokofitch, how hard it is to be a mother! But hereare the stairs.... What an awful staircase!"

　　"Mother, you are quite pale, don't distress yourself, darling," saidDounia caressing her, then with flashing eyes she added: "He oughtto be happy at seeing you, and you are tormenting yourself so."

　　"Wait, I'll peep in and see whether he has waked up."

　　The ladies slowly followed Razumihin, who went on before, and whenthey reached the landlady's door on the fourth storey, they noticedthat her door was a tiny crack open and that two keen black eyeswere watching them from the darkness within. When their eyes met,the door was suddenly shut with such a slam that PulcheriaAlexandrovna almost cried out.

　　Chapter Three

　　"HE IS well, quite well!" Zossimov cried cheerfully as they entered.

　　He had come in ten minutes earlier and was sitting in the same placeas before, on the sofa. Raskolnikov was sitting in the oppositecorner, fully dressed and carefully washed and combed, as he had notbeen for some time past. The room was immediately crowded, yetNastasya managed to follow the visitors in and stayed to listen.

　　Raskolnikov really was almost well, as compared with his conditionthe day before, but he was still pale, listless, and sombre. He lookedlike a wounded man or one who has undergone some terrible physicalsuffering. His brows were knitted, his lips compressed, his eyesfeverish. He spoke little and reluctantly, as though performing aduty, and there was a restlessness in his movements.

　　He only wanted a sling on his arm or a bandage on his finger tocomplete the impression of a man with a painful abscess or a brokenarm. The pale, sombre face lighted up for a moment when his mother andsister entered, but this only gave it a look of more intensesuffering, in place of its listless dejection. The light soon diedaway, but the look of suffering remained, and Zossimov, watching andstudying his patient with all the zest of a young doctor beginningto practise, noticed in him no joy at the arrival of his mother andsister, but a sort of bitter, hidden determination to bear anotherhour or two of inevitable torture. He saw later that almost every wordof the following conversation seemed to touch on some sore place andirritate it. But at the same time he marvelled at the power ofcontrolling himself and hiding his feelings in a patient who theprevious day had, like a monomaniac, fallen into a frenzy at theslightest word.

　　"Yes, I see myself now that I am almost well," said Raskolnikov,giving his mother and sister a kiss of welcome which made PulcheriaAlexandrovna radiant at once. "And I don't say this as I didyesterday," he said addressing Razumihin, with a friendly pressureof his hand.

　　"Yes, indeed, I am quite surprised at him to-day," began Zossimov,much delighted at the ladies' entrance, for he had not succeeded inkeeping up a conversation with his patient for ten minutes. "Inanother three or four days, if he goes on like this, he will be justas before, that is, as he was a month ago, or two... or perhaps eventhree. This has been coming on for a long while.... eh? Confess,now, that it has been perhaps your own fault?" he added, with atentative smile, as though still afraid of irritating him.

　　"It is very possible," answered Raskolnikov coldly.

　　"I should say, too," continued Zossimov with zest, "that yourcomplete recovery depends solely on yourself. Now that one can talk toyou, I should like to impress upon you that it is essential to avoidthe elementary, so to speak, fundamental causes tending to produceyour morbid condition: in that case you will be cured, if not, it willgo from bad to worse. These fundamental causes I don't know, butthey must be known to you. You are an intelligent man, and must haveobserved yourself, of course. I fancy the first stage of yourderangement coincides with your leaving the university. You must notbe left without occupation, and so, work and a definite aim set beforeyou might, I fancy, be very beneficial."

　　"Yes, yes; you are perfectly right.... I will make haste andreturn to the university: and then everything will go smoothly...."

　　Zossimov, who had begun his sage advice partly to make an effectbefore the ladies, was certainly somewhat mystified, when, glancing athis patient, he observed unmistakable mockery on his face. This lastedan instant, however. Pulcheria Alexandrovna began at once thankingZossimov, especially for his visit to their lodging the previousnight.

　　"What! he saw you last night?" Raskolnikov asked, as thoughstartled. "Then you have not slept either after your journey."

　　"Ach, Rodya, that was only till two o'clock. Dounia and I never goto bed before two at home."

　　"I don't know how to thank him either," Raskolnikov went on suddenlyfrowning and looking down. "Setting aside the question of payment-forgive me for referring to it (he turned to Zossimov)- I really don'tknow what I have done to deserve such special attention from you! Isimply don't understand it... and... and... it weighs upon me, indeed,because I don't understand it. I tell you so candidly."

　　"Don't be irritated." Zossimov forced himself to laugh. "Assume thatyou are my first patient- well- we fellows just beginning topractise love our first patients as if they were our children, andsome almost fall in love with them. And, of course, I am not rich inpatients."

　　"I say nothing about him," added Raskolnikov, pointing to Razumihin,"though he has had nothing from me either but insult and trouble."

　　"What nonsense he is talking! Why, you are in a sentimental moodto-day, are you?" shouted Razumihin.

　　If he had had more penetration he would have seen that there wasno trace of sentimentality in him, but something indeed quite theopposite. But Avdotya Romanovna noticed it. She was intently anduneasily watching her brother.

　　"As for you, mother, I don't dare to speak," he went on, as thoughrepeating a lesson learned by heart. "It is only to-day that I havebeen able to realise a little how distressed you must have been hereyesterday, waiting for me to come back."

　　When he had said this, he suddenly held out his hand to hissister, smiling without a word. But in this smile there was a flash ofreal unfeigned feeling. Dounia caught it at once, and warmly pressedhis hand, overjoyed and thankful. It was the first time he hadaddressed her since their dispute the previous day. The mother'sface lighted up with ecstatic happiness at the sight of thisconclusive unspoken reconciliation. "Yes, that is what I love himfor," Razumihin, exaggerating it all, muttered to himself, with avigorous turn in his chair. "He has these movements."

　　"And how well he does it all," the mother was thinking to herself."What generous impulses he has, and how simply, how delicately heput an end to all the misunderstanding with his sister- simply byholding out his hand at the right minute and looking at her likethat.... And what fine eyes he has, and how fine his whole face is!...He is even better looking than Dounia.... But, good heavens, what asuit- how terribly he's dressed!... Vasya, the messenger boy inAfanasy Ivanitch's shop, is better dressed! I could rush at him andhug him... weep over him- but I am afraid.... Oh, dear, he's sostrange! He's talking kindly, but I'm afraid! Why, what am I afraidof?..."

　　"Oh, Rodya, you wouldn't believe," she began suddenly, in haste toanswer his words to her, "how unhappy Dounia and I were yesterday! Nowthat it's all over and done with and we are quite happy again- I cantell you. Fancy, we ran here almost straight from the train to embraceyou and that woman- ah, here she is! Good morning, Nastasya!... Shetold us at once that you were lying in a high fever and had just runaway from the doctor in delirium, and they were looking for you in thestreets. You can't imagine how we felt! I couldn't help thinking ofthe tragic end of Lieutenant Potanchikov, a friend of your father's-you can't remember him, Rodya- who ran out in the same way in a highfever and fell into the well in the courtyard and they couldn't pullhim out till next day. Of course, we exaggerated things. We were onthe point of rushing to find Pyotr Petrovitch to ask him to help....Because we were alone, utterly alone," she said plaintively andstopped short, suddenly, recollecting it was still somewhatdangerous to speak of Pyotr Petrovitch, although "we are quite happyagain."

　　"Yes, yes.... Of course it's very annoying...." Raskolnikov mutteredin reply, but with such a preoccupied and inattentive air thatDounia gazed at him in perplexity.

　　"What else was it I wanted to say," he went on trying torecollect. "Oh, yes; mother, and you too, Dounia, please don't thinkthat I didn't mean to come and see you to-day and was waiting foryou to come first."

　　"What are you saying, Rodya?" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. She,too, was surprised.

　　"Is he answering us as a duty?" Dounia wondered. "Is he beingreconciled and asking forgiveness as though he were performing arite or repeating a lesson?"

　　"I've only just waked up, and wanted to go to you, but was delayedowing to my clothes; I forgot yesterday to ask her... Nastasya... towash out the blood... I've only just dressed."

　　"Blood! What blood?" Pulcheria Alexandrovna asked in alarm.

　　"Oh, nothing- don't be uneasy. It was when I was wandering aboutyesterday, rather delirious, I chanced upon a man who had been runover... a clerk..."

　　"Delirious? But you remember everything!" Razumihin interrupted.

　　"That's true," Raskolnikov answered with special carefulness. "Iremember everything even to the slightest detail, and yet- why I didthat and went there and said that, I can't clearly explain now."

　　"A familiar phenomenon," interposed Zossimov, "actions are sometimesperformed in a masterly and most cunning way, while the direction ofthe actions is deranged and dependent on various morbid impressions-it's like a dream."

　　"Perhaps it's a good thing really that he should think me almost amadman," thought Raskolnikov.

　　"Why, people in perfect health act in the same way too," observedDounia, looking uneasily at Zossimov.

　　"There is some truth in your observation," the latter replied. "Inthat sense we are certainly all not infrequently like madmen, but withthe slight difference that the deranged are somewhat madder, for wemust draw a line. A normal man, it is true, hardly exists. Amongdozens- perhaps hundreds of thousands- hardly one is to be met with."

　　At the word "madman," carelessly dropped by Zossimov in hischatter on his favourite subject, every one frowned.

　　Raskolnikov sat seeming not to pay attention, plunged in thoughtwith a strange smile on his pale lips. He was still meditating onsomething.

　　"Well, what about the man who was run over? I interrupted you!"Razumihin cried hastily.

　　"What?" Raskolnikov seemed to wake up. "Oh... I got spattered withblood helping to carry him to his lodging. By the way, mamma, I did anunpardonable thing yesterday. I was literally out of my mind. I gaveaway all the money you sent me... to his wife for the funeral. She's awidow now, in consumption, a poor creature... three little children,starving... nothing in the house... there's a daughter, too... perhapsyou'd have given it yourself if you'd seen them. But I had no right todo it I admit, especially as I knew how you needed the money yourself.To help others one must have the right to do it, or else Crevez,chiens, si vous n'etes pas contents." He laughed, "That's right, isn'tit, Dounia?"

　　"No, it's not," answered Dounia firmly.

　　"Bah! you, too, have ideals," he muttered, looking at her almostwith hatred, and smiling sarcastically. "I ought to have consideredthat.... Well, that's praiseworthy, and it's better for you... andif you reach a line you won't overstep, you will be unhappy... andif you overstep it, maybe you will be still unhappier.... But allthat's nonsense," he added irritably, vexed at being carried away."I only meant to say that I beg your forgiveness, mother," heconcluded, shortly and abruptly.

　　"That's enough, Rodya, I am sure that everything you do is verygood," said his mother, delighted.

　　"Don't be too sure," he answered, twisting his mouth into a smile.

　　A silence followed. There was a certain constraint in all thisconversation, and in the silence, and in the reconciliation, and inthe forgiveness, and all were feeling it.

　　"It is as though they were afraid of me," Raskolnikov was thinkingto himself, looking askance at his mother and sister. PulcheriaAlexandrovna was indeed growing more timid the longer she kept silent.

　　"Yet in their absence I seemed to love them so much," flashedthrough his mind.

　　"Do you know, Rodya, Marfa Petrovna is dead," Pulcheria Alexandrovnasuddenly blurted out.

　　"What Marfa Petrovna?"

　　"Oh, mercy on us- Marfa Petrovna Svidrigailov. I wrote you so muchabout her."

　　"A-a-h! Yes, I remember.... So she's dead! Oh, really?" he rousedhimself suddenly, as if waking up. "What did she die of?"

　　"Only imagine, quite suddenly," Pulcheria Alexandrovna answeredhurriedly, encouraged by his curiosity. "On the very day I was sendingyou that letter! Would you believe it, that awful man seems to havebeen the cause of her death. They say he beat her dreadfully."

　　"Why, were they on such bad terms?" he asked, addressing his sister.

　　"Not at all. Quite the contrary indeed. With her, he was always verypatient, considerate even. In fact, all those seven years of theirmarried life he gave way to her, too much so indeed, in many cases.All of a sudden he seems to have lost patience."

　　"Then he could not have been so awful if he controlled himself forseven years? You seem to be defending him, Dounia?"

　　"No, no, he's an awful man! I can imagine nothing more awful!"Dounia answered, almost with a shudder, knitting her brows, andsinking into thought.

　　"That had happened in the morning," Pulcheria Alexandrovna went onhurriedly. "And directly afterwards she ordered the horses to beharnessed to drive to the town immediately after dinner. She alwaysused to drive to the town in such cases. She ate a very good dinner, Iam told...."

　　"After the beating?"

　　"That was always her... habit; and immediately after dinner, so asnot to be late in starting, she went to the bathhouse.... You see, shewas undergoing some treatment with baths. They have a cold springthere, and she used to bathe in it regularly every day, and nosooner had she got into the water when she suddenly had a stroke!"

　　"I should think so," said Zossimov.

　　"And did he beat her badly?"

　　"What does that matter!" put in Dounia.

　　"H'm! But I don't know why you want to tell us such gossip, mother,"said Raskolnikov irritably, as it were in spite of himself.

　　"Ah, my dear, I don't know what to talk about," broke from PulcheriaAlexandrovna.

　　"Why, are you all afraid of me?" he asked, with a constrained smile.

　　"That's certainly true," said Dounia, looking directly and sternlyat her brother. "Mother was crossing herself with terror as she cameup the stairs."

　　His face worked, as though in convulsion.

　　"Ach, what are you saying, Dounia! Don't be angry, please, Rodya....Why did you say that, Dounia?" Pulcheria Alexandrovna began,overwhelmed- "You see, coming here, I was dreaming all the way, in thetrain, how we should meet, how we should talk over everythingtogether.... And I was so happy, I did not notice the journey! Butwhat am I saying? I am happy now.... You should not, Dounia.... I amhappy now- simply in seeing you, Rodya...."

　　"Hush, mother," he muttered in confusion, not looking at her, butpressing her hand. "We shall have time to speak freely of everything!"

　　As he said this, he was suddenly overwhelmed with confusion andturned pale. Again that awful sensation he had known of late passedwith deadly chill over his soul. Again it became suddenly plain andperceptible to him that he had just told a fearful lie- that hewould never now be able to speak freely of everything- that he wouldnever again be able to speak of anything to any one. The anguish ofthis thought was such that for a moment he almost forgot himself. Hegot up from his seat, and not looking at any one walked towards thedoor.

　　"What are you about?" cried Razumihin, clutching him by the arm.

　　He sat down again, and began looking about him, in silence. Theywere all looking at him in perplexity.

　　"But what are you all so dull for?" he shouted, suddenly and quiteunexpectedly. "Do say something! What's the use of sitting likethis? Come, do speak. Let us talk.... We meet together and sit insilence.... Come, anything!"

　　"Thank God; I was afraid the same thing as yesterday was beginningagain," said Pulcheria Alexandrovna, crossing herself.

　　"What is the matter, Rodya?" asked Avdotya Romanovna, distrustfully.

　　"Oh, nothing! I remembered something," he answered, and suddenlylaughed.

　　"Well, if you remembered something; that's all right!... I wasbeginning to think..." muttered Zossimov, getting up from the sofa."It is time for me to be off. I will look in again perhaps... if Ican..." He made his bows, and went out.

　　"What an excellent man!" observed Pulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　"Yes, excellent, splendid, well-educated, intelligent,"Raskolnikov began, suddenly speaking with surprising rapidity, and aliveliness he had not shown till then. "I can't remember where I methim before my illness.... I believe I have met him somewhere-... Andthis is a good man, too," he nodded at Razumihin. "Do you like him,Dounia?" he asked her; and suddenly, for some unknown reason, laughed.

　　"Very much," answered Dounia.

　　"Foo- what a pig you are," Razumihin protested, blushing in terribleconfusion, and he got up from his chair. Pulcheria Alexandrovna smiledfaintly, but Raskolnikov laughed aloud.

　　"Where are you off to?"

　　"I must go."

　　"You need not at all. Stay. Zossimov has gone, so you must. Don'tgo. What's the time? Is it twelve o'clock? What a pretty watch youhave got, Dounia. But why are you all silent again? I do all thetalking."

　　"It was a present from Marfa Petrovna," answered Dounia.

　　"And a very expensive one!" added Pulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　"A-ah! What a big one! Hardly like a lady's."

　　"I like that sort," said Dounia.

　　"So it is not a present from her fiance," thought Razumihin, and wasunreasonably delighted.

　　"I thought it was Luzhin's present," observed Raskolnikov.

　　"No, he has not made Dounia any presents yet."

　　"A-ah! And do you remember, mother, I was in love and wanted toget married?" he said suddenly, looking at his mother, who wasdisconcerted by the sudden change of subject and the way he spoke ofit.

　　"Oh, yes, my dear."

　　Pulcheria Alexandrovna exchanged glances with Dounia and Razumihin.

　　"H'm, yes. What shall I tell you? I don't remember much indeed.She was such a sickly girl," he went on, growing dreamy and lookingdown again. "Quite an invalid. She was fond of giving alms to thepoor, and was always dreaming of a nunnery, and once she burst intotears when she began talking to me about it. Yes, yes, I remember. Iremember very well. She was an ugly little thing. I really don'tknow what drew me to her then- I think it was because she was alwaysill. If she had been lame or hunchback, I believe I should haveliked her better still," he smiled dreamily. "Yes, it was a sort ofspring delirium."

　　"No, it was not only spring delirium," said Dounia, with warmfeeling.

　　He fixed a strained intent look on his sister, but did not hear ordid not understand her words. Then, completely lost in thought, he gotup, went up to his mother, kissed her, went back to his place andsat down.

　　"You love her even now?" said Pulcheria Alexandrovna, touched.

　　"Her? Now? Oh, yes.... You ask about her? No... that's all now as itwere, in another world... and so long ago. And indeed everythinghappening here seems somehow far away." He looked attentively at them."You now... I seem to be looking at you from a thousand milesaway... but, goodness knows why we are talking of that! And what's theuse of asking about it," he added with annoyance, and biting hisnails, he fell into dreamy silence again.

　　"What a wretched lodging you have, Rodya! It's like a tomb," saidPulcheria Alexandrovna, suddenly breaking the oppressive silence. "Iam sure it's quite half through your lodging you have become somelancholy."

　　"My lodging," he answered, listlessly. "Yes, the lodging had a greatdeal to do with it.... I thought that, too.... If only you knew,though, what a strange thing you said just now, mother," he said,laughing strangely.

　　A little more, and their companionship, this mother and this sister,with him after three years' absence, this intimate tone ofconversation, in face of the utter impossibility of really speakingabout anything, would have been beyond his power of endurance. Butthere was one urgent matter which must be settled one way or the otherthat day- so he had decided when he woke. Now he was glad toremember it, as a means of escape.

　　"Listen, Dounia," he began, gravely and drily, "of course I beg yourpardon for yesterday, but I consider it my duty to tell you again thatI do not withdraw from my chief point. It is me or Luzhin. If I am ascoundrel, you must not be. One is enough. If you marry Luzhin, Icease at once to look on you as a sister."

　　"Rodya, Rodya! It is the same as yesterday again," PulcheriaAlexandrovna cried, mournfully. "And why do you call yourself ascoundrel? I can't bear it. You said the same yesterday."

　　"Brother," Dounia answered firmly and with the same dryness. "In allthis there is a mistake on your part. I thought it over at night,and found out the mistake. It is all because you seem to fancy I amsacrificing myself to some one and for some one. That is not thecase at all. I am simply marrying for my own sake, because thingsare hard for me. Though, of course, I shall be glad if I succeed inbeing useful to my family. But that is not the chief motive for mydecision...."

　　"She is lying," he thought to himself, biting his nailsvindictively. "Proud creature! She won't admit she wants to do itout of charity! Too haughty! Oh, base characters! They even love asthough they hate.... Oh, how I... hate them all!"

　　"In fact," continued Dounia, "I am marrying Pyotr Petrovitch becauseof two evils I choose the less. I intend to do honestly all he expectsof me, so I am not deceiving him.... Why did you smile just now?" She,too, flushed, and there was a gleam of anger in her eyes.

　　"All?" he asked, with a malignant grin.

　　"Within certain limits. Both the manner and form of PyotrPetrovitch's courtship showed me at once what he wanted. He may, ofcourse, think too well of himself, but I hope he esteems me, too....Why are you laughing again?"

　　"And why are you blushing again? You are lying, sister. You areintentionally lying, simply from feminine obstinacy, simply to holdyour own against me.... You cannot respect Luzhin. I have seen him andtalked with him. So you are selling yourself for money, and so inany case you are acting basely, and I am glad at least that you canblush for it."

　　"It is not true. I am not lying," cried Dounia, losing hercomposure. "I would not marry him if I were not convinced that heesteems me and thinks highly of me. I would not marry him if I werenot firmly convinced that I can respect him. Fortunately, I can haveconvincing proof of it this very day... and such a marriage is not avileness, as you say! And even if you were right, if I really haddetermined on a vile action, is it not merciless on your part to speakto me like that? Why do you demand of me a heroism that perhaps youhave not either? It is despotism; it is tyranny. If I ruin any one, itis only myself.... I am not committing a murder. Why do you look at melike that? Why are you so pale? Rodya, darling, what's the matter?"

　　"Good heavens! You have made him faint," cried PulcheriaAlexandrovna.

　　"No, no, nonsense! It's nothing. A little giddiness- not fainting.You have fainting on the brain. H'm, yes, what was I saying? Oh,yes. In what way will you get convincing proof to-day that you canrespect him, and that he... esteems you, as you said. I think you saidto-day?"

　　"Mother, show Rodya Pyotr Petrovitch's letter," said Dounia.

　　With trembling hands, Pulcheria Alexandrovna gave him the letter. Hetook it with great interest, but, before opening it, he suddenlylooked with a sort of wonder at Dounia.

　　"It is strange," he said, slowly, as though struck by a new idea."What am I making such a fuss for? What is it all about? Marry whomyou like!"

　　He said this as though to himself, but said it aloud, and looked forsome time at his sister, as though puzzled. He opened the letter atlast, still with the same look of strange wonder on his face. Then,slowly and attentively, he began reading, and read it through twice.Pulcheria Alexandrovna showed marked anxiety, and all indeedexpected something particular.

　　"What surprises me," he began, after a short pause, handing theletter to his mother, but not addressing any one in particular, "isthat he is a business man, a lawyer, and his conversation ispretentious indeed, and yet he writes such an uneducated letter."

　　They all started. They had expected something quite different.

　　"But they all write like that, you know," Razumihin observed,abruptly.

　　"Have you read it?"

　　"Yes."

　　"We showed him, Rodya. We... consulted him just now," PulcheriaAlexandrovna began, embarrassed.

　　"That's just the jargon of the courts," Razumihin put in. "Legaldocuments are written like that to this day."

　　"Legal? Yes, it's just legal- business language- not so veryuneducated, and not quite educated- business language!"

　　"Pyotr Petrovitch makes no secret of the fact that he had a cheapeducation, he is proud indeed of having made his own way," AvdotyaRomanovna observed, somewhat offended by her brother's tone.

　　"Well, if he's proud of it, he has reason, I don't deny it. You seemto be offended, sister, at my making only such a frivolous criticismon the letter, and to think that I speak of such trifling matters onpurpose to annoy you. It is quite the contrary, an observation aproposof the style occurred to me that is by no means irrelevant as thingsstand. There is one expression, 'blame yourselves' put in verysignificantly and plainly, and there is besides a threat that hewill go away at once if I am present. That threat to go away isequivalent to a threat to abandon you both if you are disobedient, andto abandon you now after summoning you to Petersburg. Well, what doyou think? Can one resent such an expression from Luzhin, as we shouldif he (he pointed to Razumihin) had written it, or Zossimov, or one ofus?"

　　"N-no," answered Dounia, with more animation. "I saw clearly that itwas too naively expressed, and that perhaps he simply has no skillin writing... that is a true criticism, brother. I did not expect,indeed..."

　　"It is expressed in legal style, and sounds coarser than perhapshe intended. But I must disillusion you a little. There is oneexpression in the letter, one slander about me, and rather acontemptible one. I gave the money last night to the widow, a woman inconsumption, crushed with trouble, and not 'on the pretext of thefuneral,' but simply to pay for the funeral, and not to thedaughter- a young woman, as he writes, of notorious behaviour (whomI saw last night for the first time in my life)- but to the widow.In all this I see a too hasty desire to slander me and to raisedissension between us. It is expressed again in legal jargon, thatis to say, with a too obvious display of the aim, and with a verynaive eagerness. He is a man of intelligence, but to act sensibly,intelligence is not enough. It all shows the man and... I don'tthink he has a great esteem for you. I tell you this simply to warnyou, because I sincerely wish for your good..."

　　Dounia did not reply. Her resolution had been taken. She was onlyawaiting the evening.

　　"Then what is your decision, Rodya?" asked Pulcheria Alexandrovna,who was more uneasy than ever at the sudden, new businesslike toneof his talk.

　　"What decision?"

　　"You see Pyotr Petrovitch writes that you are not to be with us thisevening, and that he will go away if you come. So will you... come?"

　　"That, of course, is not for me to decide, but for you first, if youare not offended by such a request; and secondly, by Dounia, if she,too, is not offended. I will do what you think best," he added drily.

　　"Dounia has already decided, and I fully agree with her,"Pulcheria Alexandrovna hastened to declare.

　　"I decided to ask you, Rodya, to urge you not to fail to be withus at this interview," said Dounia. "Will you come?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I will ask you, too, to be with us at eight o'clock," she said,addressing Razumihin. "Mother, I am inviting him, too."

　　"Quite right, Dounia. Well, since you have decided," added PulcheriaAlexandrovna, "so be it. I shall feel easier myself. I do not likeconcealment and deception. Better let us have the whole truth....Pyotr Petrovitch may be angry or not, now!"

　　Chapter Four

　　AT THAT moment the door was softly opened, and a young girl walkedinto the room, looking timidly about her. Every one turned towards herwith surprise and curiosity. At first sight, Raskolnikov did notrecognise her. It was Sofya Semyonovna Marmeladov. He had seen heryesterday for the first time, but at such a moment, in suchsurroundings and in such a dress, that his memory retained a verydifferent image of her. Now she was a modestly and poorly-dressedyoung girl, very young, indeed almost like a child, with a modestand refined manner, with a candid but somewhat frightened-lookingface. She was wearing a very plain indoor dress, and had on a shabbyold-fashioned hat, but she still carried a parasol. Unexpectedlyfinding the room full of people, she was not so much embarrassed ascompletely overwhelmed with shyness, like a little child. She was evenabout to retreat. "Oh.... it's you!" said Raskolnikov, extremelyastonished, and he, too, was confused. He at once recollected that hismother and sister knew through Luzhin's letter of "some young woman ofnotorious behaviour." He had only just been protesting againstLuzhin's calumny and declaring that he had seen the girl last nightfor the first time, and suddenly she had walked in. He remembered,too, that he had not protested against the expression "of notoriousbehaviour." All this passed vaguely and fleetingly through hisbrain, but looking at her more intently, he saw that the humiliatedcreature was so humiliated that he felt suddenly sorry for her. Whenshe made a movement to retreat in terror, it sent a pang to his heart.

　　"I did not expect you," he said, hurriedly, with a look that madeher stop. "Please sit down. You come, no doubt, from KaterinaIvanovna. Allow me- not there. Sit here...."

　　At Sonia's entrance, Razumihin, who had been sitting on one ofRaskolnikov's three chairs, close to the door, got up to allow herto enter. Raskolnikov had at first shown her the place on the sofawhere Zossimov had been sitting, but feeling that the sofa whichserved him as a bed, was too familiar a place, he hurriedly motionedher to Razumihin's chair.

　　"You sit here," he said to Razumihin, putting him on the sofa.

　　Sonia sat down, almost shaking with terror, and looked timidly atthe two ladies. It was evidently almost inconceivable to herselfthat she could sit down beside them. At the thought of it, she wasso frightened that she hurriedly got up again, and in utterconfusion addressed Raskolnikov.

　　"I... I... have come for one minute. Forgive me for disturbing you,"she began falteringly. "I come from Katerina Ivanovna, and she hadno one to send. Katerina Ivanovna told me to beg you... to be at theservice... in the morning... at Mitrofanievsky... and then... to us...to her... to do her the honour... she told me to beg you..." Soniastammered and ceased speaking.

　　"I will try, certainly, most certainly," answered Raskolnikov. He,too, stood up, and he, too, faltered and could not finish hissentence. "Please sit down," he said, suddenly. "I want to talk toyou. You are perhaps in a hurry, but please, be so kind, spare metwo minutes," and he drew up a chair for her.

　　Sonia sat down again, and again timidly she took a hurried,frightened look at the two ladies, and dropped her eyes. Raskolnikov'spale face flushed, a shudder passed over him, his eyes glowed.

　　"Mother," he said, firmly and insistently, "this is Sofya SemyonovnaMarmeladov, the daughter of that unfortunate Mr. Marmeladov, who wasrun over yesterday before my eyes, and of whom I was just tellingyou."

　　Pulcheria Alexandrovna glanced at Sonia, and slightly screwed up hereyes. In spite of her embarrassment before Rodya's urgent andchallenging look, she could not deny herself that satisfaction. Douniagazed gravely and intently into the poor girl's face, andscrutinised her with perplexity. Sonia, hearing herself introduced,tried to raise her eyes again, but was more embarrassed than ever.

　　"I wanted to ask you," said Raskolnikov, hastily, "how things werearranged yesterday. You were not worried by the police, for instance?"

　　"No, that was all right... it was too evident, the cause of death...they did not worry us... only the lodgers are angry."

　　"Why?"

　　"At the body's remaining so long. You see it is hot now. So that,to-day, they will carry it to the cemetery, into the chapel, untilto-morrow. At first Katerina Ivanovna was unwilling, but now shesees herself that it's necessary..."

　　"To-day, then?"

　　"She begs you to do us the honour to be in the church to-morrowfor the service, and then to be present at the funeral lunch."

　　"She is giving a funeral lunch?"

　　"Yes... just a little.... She told me to thank you very much forhelping us yesterday. But for you, we should have had nothing forthe funeral."

　　All at once her lips and chin began trembling, but, with aneffort, she controlled herself, looking down again.

　　During the conversation, Raskolnikov watched her carefully. Shehad a thin, very thin, pale little face, rather irregular and angular,with a sharp little nose and chin. She could not have been calledpretty, but her blue eyes were so clear, and when they lighted up,there was such a kindliness and simplicity in her expression thatone could not help being attracted. Her face, and her whole figureindeed, had another peculiar characteristic. In spite of hereighteen years, she looked almost a little girl- almost a child. Andin some of her gestures, this childishness seemed almost absurd.

　　"But has Katerina Ivanovna been able to manage with such smallmeans? Does she even mean to have a funeral lunch?" Raskolnikov asked,persistently keeping up the conversation.

　　"The coffin will be plain, of course... and everything will beplain, so it won't cost much. Katerina Ivanovna and I have reckoned itall out, so that there will be enough left... and Katerina Ivanovnawas very anxious it should be so. You know one can't... it's a comfortto her... she is like that, you know...."

　　"I understand, I understand... of course... why do you look at myroom like that? My mother has just said it is like a tomb."

　　"You gave us everything yesterday," Sonia said suddenly, in reply,in a loud rapid whisper; and again she looked down in confusion. Herlips and chin were trembling once more. She had been struck at once byRaskolnikov's poor surroundings, and now these words broke outspontaneously. A silence followed. There was a light in Dounia's eyes,and even Pulcheria Alexandrovna looked kindly at Sonia.

　　"Rodya," she said, getting up, "we shall have dinner together, ofcourse. Come, Dounia.... And you, Rodya, had better go for a littlewalk, and then rest and lie down before you come to see us.... I amafraid we have exhausted you...."

　　"Yes, yes, I'll come," he answered, getting up fussily. "But Ihave something to see to."

　　"But surely you will have dinner together?" cried Razumihin, lookingin surprise at Raskolnikov. "What do you mean?"

　　"Yes, yes, I am coming... of course, of course! And you stay aminute. You do not want him just now, do you, mother? Or perhaps Iam taking him from you?"

　　"Oh, no, no. And will you, Dmitri Prokofitch, do us the favour ofdining with us?"

　　"Please do," added Dounia.

　　Razumihin bowed, positively radiant. For one moment, they were allstrangely embarrassed.

　　"Good-bye, Rodya, that is till we meet. I do not like sayinggood-bye. Good-bye, Nastasya. Ah, I have said good-bye again."

　　Pulcheria Alexandrovna meant to greet Sonia, too; but it somehowfailed to come off, and she went in a flutter out of the room.

　　But Avdotya Romanovna seemed to await her turn, and following hermother out, gave Sonia an attentive, courteous bow. Sonia, inconfusion, gave a hurried, frightened curtsy. There was a look ofpoignant discomfort in her face, as though Avdotya Romanovna'scourtesy and attention were oppressive and painful to her.

　　"Dounia, good-bye," called Raskolnikov, in the passage. "Give meyour hand."

　　"Why, I did give it to you. Have you forgotten?" said Dounia,turning warmly and awkwardly to him.

　　"Never mind, give it to me again." And he squeezed her fingerswarmly.

　　Dounia smiled, flushed, pulled her hand away, and went off quitehappy.

　　"Come, that's capital," he said to Sonia, going back and lookingbrightly at her. "God give peace to the dead, the living have still tolive. That is right, isn't it?"

　　Sonia looked surprised at the sudden brightness of his face. Helooked at her for some moments in silence. The whole history of thedead father floated before his memory in those moments....-

　　"Heavens, Dounia," Pulcheria Alexandrovna began, as soon as theywere in the street, "I really feel relieved myself at coming away-more at ease. How little did I think yesterday in the train that Icould ever be glad of that."

　　"I tell you again, mother, he is still very ill. Don't you see it?Perhaps worrying about us upset him. We must be patient, and much,much can be forgiven."

　　"Well, you were not very patient!" Pulcheria Alexandrovna caught herup, hotly and jealously. "Do you know, Dounia, I was looking at youtwo. You are the very portrait of him, and not so much in face as insoul. You are both melancholy, both morose and hot tempered, bothhaughty and both generous.... Surely he can't be an egoist, Dounia.Eh? When I think of what is in store for us this evening, my heartsinks!"

　　"Don't be uneasy, mother. What must be, will be."

　　"Dounia, only think what a position we are in! What if PyotrPetrovitch breaks it off?" poor Pulcheria Alexandrovna blurted out,incautiously.

　　"He won't be worth much if he does," answered Dounia, sharply andcontemptuously.

　　"We did well to come away," Pulcheria Alexandrovna hurriedly brokein. "He was in a hurry about some business or other. If he gets outand has a breath of air... it is fearfully close in his room.... Butwhere is one to get a breath of air here. The very streets here feellike shut-up rooms. Good heavens! what a town!... stay... this side...they will crush you- carrying something. Why, it is a piano theyhave got, I declare... how they push... I am very much afraid ofthat young woman, too."

　　"What young woman, mother?

　　"Why, that Sofya Semyonovna, who was there just now."

　　"Why?"

　　"I have a presentiment, Dounia. Well, you may believe it or not, butas soon as she came in, that very minute, I felt that she was thechief cause of the trouble...."

　　"Nothing of the sort!" cried Dounia, in vexation. "What nonsense,with your presentiments, mother! He only made her acquaintance theevening before, and he did not know her when she came in."

　　"Well, you will see.... She worries me; but you will see, you willsee! I was so frightened. She was gazing at me with those eyes. Icould scarcely sit still in my chair when he began introducing her, doyou remember? It seems so strange, but Pyotr Petrovitch writes likethat about her, and he introduces her to us- to you! So he mustthink a great deal of her."

　　"People will write anything. We were talked about and written about,too. Have you forgotten? I am sure that she is a good girl, and thatit is all nonsense."

　　"God grant it may be!"

　　"And Pyotr Petrovitch is a contemptible slanderer," Dounia snappedout, suddenly.

　　Pulcheria Alexandrovna was crushed; the conversation was notresumed.-

　　"I will tell you what I want with you," said Raskolnikov, drawingRazumihin to the window.

　　"Then I will tell Katerina Ivanovna that you are coming," Sonia saidhurriedly, preparing to depart.

　　"One minute, Sofya Semyonovna. We have no secrets. You are not inour way. I want to have another word or two with you. Listen!" heturned suddenly to Razumihin again. "You know that... what's hisname... Porfiry Petrovitch?"

　　"I should think so! He is a relation. Why?" added the latter, withinterest.

　　"Is not he managing that case... you know about that murder?...You were speaking about it yesterday."

　　"Yes... well?" Razumihin's eyes opened wide.

　　"He was inquiring for people who had pawned things, and I havesome pledges there, too- trifles- a ring my sister gave me as akeepsake when I left home, and my father's silver watch- they are onlyworth five or six roubles altogether... but I value them. So what am Ito do now? I do not want to lose the things, especially the watch. Iwas quaking just now, for fear mother would ask to look at it, when wespoke of Dounia's watch. It is the only thing of father's left us. Shewould be ill if it were lost. You know what women are. So tell me whatto do. I know I ought to have given notice at the police station,but would it not be better to go straight to Porfiry? Eh? What doyou think? The matter might be settled more quickly. You see mothermay ask for it before dinner."

　　"Certainly not to the police station. Certainly to Porfiry,"Razumihin shouted in extraordinary excitement. "Well, how glad I am.Let us go at once. It is a couple of steps. We shall be sure to findhim."

　　"Very well, let us go."

　　"And he will be very, very glad to make your acquaintance. I haveoften talked to him of you at different times. I was speaking of youyesterday. Let us go. So you knew the old woman? So that's it! It isall turning out splendidly.... Oh, yes, Sofya Ivanovna..."

　　"Sofya Semyonovna," corrected Raskolnikov. "Sofya Semyonovna, thisis my friend Razumihin, and he is a good man."

　　"If you have to go now," Sonia was beginning, not looking atRazumihin at all, and still more embarrassed.

　　"Let us go," decided Raskolnikov. "I will come to you to-day,Sofya Semyonovna. Only tell me where you live."

　　He was not exactly ill at ease, but seemed hurried, and avoidedher eyes. Sonia gave her address, and flushed as she did so. Theyall went out together.

　　"Don't you lock up?" asked Razumihin, following him on to thestairs.

　　"Never," answered Raskolnikov. "I have been meaning to buy a lockfor these two years. People are happy who have no need of locks," hesaid, laughing, to Sonia. They stood still in the gateway.

　　"Do you go to the right, Sofya Semyonovna? How did you find me, bythe way?" he added, as though he wanted to say something quitedifferent. He wanted to look at her soft clear eyes, but this wasnot easy.

　　"Why, you gave your address to Polenka yesterday."

　　"Polenka? Oh, yes; Polenka, that is the little girl. She is yoursister? Did I give her the address?"

　　"Why, had you forgotten?"

　　"No, I remember."

　　"I had heard my father speak of you... only I did not know yourname, and he did not know it. And now I came... and as I had learntyour name, I asked to-day, 'Where does Mr. Raskolnikov live?' I didnot know you had only a room too.... Good-bye, I will tell KaterinaIvanovna."

　　She was extremely glad to escape at last; she went away lookingdown, hurrying to get out of sight as soon as possible, to walk thetwenty steps to the turning on the right and to be at last alone,and then moving rapidly along, looking at no one, noticing nothing, tothink, to remember, to meditate on every word, every detail. Never,never had she felt anything like this. Dimly and unconsciously a wholenew world was opening before her. She remembered suddenly thatRaskolnikov meant to come to her that day, perhaps at once!

　　"Only not to-day, please, not to-day!" she kept muttering with asinking heart, as though entreating some one, like a frightened child."Mercy! to me... to that room... he will see... oh, dear!"

　　She was not capable at that instant of noticing an unknown gentlemanwho was watching her and following at her heels. He had accompaniedher from the gateway. At the moment when Razumihin, Raskolnikov, andshe stood still at parting on the pavement, this gentleman, who wasjust passing, started on hearing Sonia's words: "and I asked where Mr.Raskolnikov lived?" He turned a rapid but attentive look upon allthree, especially upon Raskolnikov, to whom Sonia was speaking; thenlooked back and noted the house. All this was done in an instant as hepassed, and trying not to betray his interest, he walked on moreslowly as though waiting for something. He was waiting for Sonia; hesaw that they were parting, and that Sonia was going home.

　　"Home? Where? I've seen that face somewhere," he thought. "I mustfind out."

　　At the turning he crossed over, looked round, and saw Sonia comingthe same way, noticing nothing. She turned the corner. He followed heron the other side. After about fifty paces he crossed over again,overtook her and kept two or three yards behind her.

　　He was a man about fifty, rather tall and thickly set, with broadhigh shoulders which made him look as though he stooped a little. Hewore good and fashionable clothes, and looked like a gentleman ofposition. He carried a handsome cane, which he tapped on thepavement at each step; his gloves were spotless. He had a broad,rather pleasant face with high cheek-bones and a fresh colour, notoften seen in Petersburg. His flaxen hair was still abundant, and onlytouched here and there with grey, and his thick square beard waseven lighter than his hair. His eyes were blue and had a cold andthoughtful look; his lips were crimson. He was a remarkedlywell-preserved man and looked much younger than his years.

　　When Sonia came out on the canal bank, they were the only twopersons on the pavement. He observed her dreaminess and preoccupation.On reaching the house where she lodged, Sonia turned in at the gate;he followed her, seeming rather surprised. In the courtyard she turnedto the right corner. "Bah!" muttered the unknown gentleman, andmounted the stairs behind her. Only then Sonia noticed him. Shereached the third storey, turned down the passage, and rang at No.9. On the door was inscribed in chalk, "Kapernaumov, Tailor." "Bah!"the stranger repeated again, wondering at the strange coincidence, andhe rang next door, at No. 8. The doors were two or three yards apart.

　　"You lodge at Kapernaumov's," he said, looking at Sonia andlaughing. "He altered a waistcoat for me yesterday. I am staying closehere at Madame Resslich's. How odd!" Sonia looked at him attentively.

　　"We are neighbours," he went on gaily. "I only came to town theday before yesterday. Good-bye for the present."

　　Sonia made no reply; the door opened and she slipped in. She feltfor some reason ashamed and uneasy.

　　On the way to Porfiry's, Razumihin was obviously excited.

　　"That's capital, brother," he repeated several times, "and I amglad! I am glad!"

　　"What are you glad about?" Raskolnikov thought to himself.

　　"I didn't know that you pledged things at the old woman's, too.And... was it long ago? I mean, was it long since you were there?"

　　"What a simple-hearted fool he is!"

　　"When was it?" Raskolnikov stopped still to recollect. "Two or threedays before her death it must have been. But I am not going toredeem the things now," he put in with a sort of hurried andconspicuous solicitude about the things. "I've not more than asilver rouble left... after last night's accursed delirium!"

　　He laid special emphasis on the delirium.

　　"Yes, yes," Razumihin hastened to agree- with what was not clear."Then that's why you... were struck... partly... you know in yourdelirium you were continually mentioning some rings or chains! Yes,yes... that's clear, it's all clear now."

　　"Hullo! How that idea must have got about among them. Here thisman will go to the stake for me, and I find him delighted at having itcleared up why I spoke of rings in my delirium! What a hold the ideamust have on all of them!"

　　"Shall we find him?" he asked suddenly.

　　"Oh, yes," Razumihin answered quickly. "He is a nice fellow you willsee, brother. Rather clumsy, that is to say, he is a man of polishedmanners, but I mean clumsy in a different sense. He is anintelligent fellow, very much so indeed, but he has his own range ofideas.... He is incredulous, sceptical, cynical... he likes toimpose on people, or rather to make fun of them. His is the old,circumstantial method.... But he understands his work...thoroughly.... Last year he cleared up a case of murder in which thepolice had hardly a clue. He is very, very anxious to make youracquaintance."

　　"On what grounds is he so anxious?"

　　"Oh, it's not exactly... you see, since you've been ill I happento have mentioned you several times.... So, when he heard about you...about your being a law student and not able to finish your studies, hesaid, 'What a pity!' And so I concluded... from everything together,not only that; yesterday, Zametov... you know, Rodya, I talked somenonsense on the way home to you yesterday, when I was drunk... I amafraid, brother, of your exaggerating it, you see."

　　"What? That they think I am a madman? Maybe they are right," he saidwith a constrained smile.

　　"Yes, yes.... That is, pooh, no!... But all that I said (and therewas something else too) it was all nonsense, drunken nonsense."

　　"But why are you apologizing? I am so sick of it all!" Raskolnikovcried with exaggerated irritability. It was partly assumed, however.

　　"I know, I know, I understand. Believe me, I understand. One'sashamed to speak of it."

　　"If you are ashamed, then don't speak of it."

　　Both were silent. Razumihin was more than ecstatic and Raskolnikovperceived it with repulsion. He was alarmed, too, by what Razumihinhad just said about Porfiry.

　　"I shall have to pull a long face with him too," he thought, witha beating heart, and he turned white, "and do it naturally, too. Butthe most natural thing would be to do nothing at all. Carefully donothing at all! No, carefully would not be natural again.... Oh, well,we shall see how it turns out.... We shall see... directly. Is it agood thing to go or not? The butterfly flies to the light. My heart isbeating, that's what's bad!"

　　"In this grey house," said Razumihin.

　　"The most important thing, does Porfiry know that I was at the oldhag's flat yesterday... and asked about the blood? I must find thatout instantly, as soon as I go in, find out from his face;otherwise... I'll find out, if it's my ruin."

　　"I say, brother," he said suddenly, addressing Razumihin, with a slysmile, "I have been noticing all day that you seem to be curiouslyexcited. Isn't it so?"

　　"Excited? Not a bit of it," said Razumihin, stung to the quick.

　　"Yes, brother, I assure you it's noticeable. Why, you sat on yourchair in a way you never do sit, on the edge somehow, and you seemedto be writhing all the time. You kept jumping up for nothing. Onemoment you were angry, and the next your face looked like a sweetmeat.You even blushed; especially when you were invited to dinner, youblushed awfully."

　　"Nothing of the sort, nonsense! What do you mean?"

　　"But why are you wriggling out of it, like a schoolboy? By Jove,there he's blushing again."

　　"What a pig you are!"

　　"But why are you so shamefaced about it? Romeo! Stay, I'll tell ofyou to-day. Ha-ha-ha! I'll make mother laugh, and some one else,too..."

　　"Listen, listen, listen, this is serious.... What next, youfiend!" Razumihin was utterly overwhelmed, turning cold with horror."What will you tell them? Come, brother... foo, what a pig you are!"

　　"You are like a summer rose. And if only you knew how it suitsyou; a Romeo over six foot high! And how you've washed to-day- youcleaned your nails, I declare. Eh? That's something unheard of! Why, Ido believe you've got pomaturn on your hair! Bend down."

　　"Pig!"

　　Raskolnikov laughed as though he could not restrain himself. Solaughing, they entered Porfiry Petrovitch's flat. This is whatRaskolnikov wanted: from within they could be heard laughing as theycame in, still guffawing in the passage.

　　"Not a word here or I'll... brain you!" Razumihin whisperedfuriously, seizing Raskolnikov by the shoulder.

　　Chapter Five

　　RASKOLNIKOV was already entering the room. He came in looking asthough he had the utmost difficulty not to burst out laughing again.Behind him Razumihin strode in gawky and awkward, shamefaced and redas a peony, with an utterly crestfallen and ferocious expression.His face and whole figure really were ridiculous at that moment andamply justified Raskolnikov's laughter. Raskolnikov, not waiting foran introduction, bowed to Porfiry Petrovitch, who stood in themiddle of the room looking inquiringly at them. He held out his handand shook hands, still apparently making desperate efforts to subduehis mirth and utter a few words to introduce himself. But he had nosooner succeeded in assuming a serious air and muttering somethingwhen he suddenly glanced again as though accidentally at Razumihin,and could no longer control himself: his stifled laughter broke outthe more irresistibly the more he tried to restrain it. Theextraordinary ferocity with which Razumihin received this"spontaneous" mirth gave the whole scene the appearance of mostgenuine fun and naturalness. Razumihin strengthened this impression asthough on purpose.

　　"Fool! You fiend," he roared, waving his arm which at once strucka little round table with an empty tea-glass on it. Everything wassent flying and crashing.

　　"But why break chairs, gentlemen? You know it's a loss to theCrown," Porfiry Petrovitch quoted gaily.

　　Raskolnikov was still laughing, with his hand in PorfiryPetrovitch's, but anxious not to overdo it, awaited the right momentto put a natural end to it. Razumihin, completely put to confusionby upsetting the table and smashing the glass, gazed gloomily at thefragments, cursed and turned sharply to the window where he stoodlooking out with his back to the company with a fiercely scowlingcountenance, seeing nothing. Porfiry Petrovitch laughed and wasready to go on laughing, but obviously looked for explanations.Zametov had been sitting in the corner, but he rose at the visitors'entrance and was standing in expectation with a smile on his lips,though he looked with surprise and even it seemed incredulity at thewhole scene and at Raskolnikov with a certain embarrassment. Zametov'sunexpected presence struck Raskolnikov unpleasantly.

　　"I've got to think of that," he thought. "Excuse me, please," hebegan, affecting extreme embarrassment. "Raskolnikov."

　　"Not at all, very pleasant to see you... and how pleasantly you'vecome in.... Why, won't he even say good-morning?" Porfiry Petrovitchnodded at Razumihin.

　　"Upon my honour I don't know why he is in such a rage with me. Ionly told him as we came along that he was like Romeo... and provedit. And that was all, I think!"

　　"Pig!" ejaculated Razumihin, without turning round.

　　"There must have been very grave grounds for it, if he is so furiousat the word," Porfiry laughed.

　　"Oh, you sharp lawyer!... Damn you all!" snapped Razumihin, andsuddenly bursting out laughing himself, he went up to Porfiry with amore cheerful face as though nothing had happened. "That'll do! We areall fools. To come to business. This is my friend Rodion RomanovitchRaskolnikov; in the first place he has heard of you and wants tomake your acquaintance, and secondly, he has a little matter ofbusiness with you. Bah! Zametov, what brought you here? Have you metbefore? Have you known each other long?"

　　"What does this mean?" thought Raskolnikov uneasily.

　　Zametov seemed taken aback, but not very much so.

　　"Why, it was at your rooms we met yesterday," he said easily.

　　"Then I have been spared the trouble. All last week he was beggingme to introduce him to you. Porfiry and you have sniffed each otherout without me. Where is your tobacco?"

　　Porfiry Petrovitch was wearing a dressing-gown, very clean linen,and trodden-down slippers. He was a man of about five and thirty,short, stout even to corpulence, and clean shaven. He wore his haircut short and had a large round head, particularly prominent at theback. His soft, round, rather snub-nosed face was of a sicklyyellowish colour, but had a vigorous and rather ironical expression.It would have been good-natured, except for a look in the eyes,which shone with a watery, mawkish light under almost white,blinking eyelashes. The expression of those eyes was strangely outof keeping with his somewhat womanish figure, and gave it somethingfar more serious than could be guessed at first sight.

　　As soon as Porfiry Petrovitch heard that his visitor had a littlematter of business with him, he begged him to sit down on the sofa andsat down himself on the other end, waiting for him to explain hisbusiness, with that careful and over-serious attention which is atonce oppressive and embarrassing, especially to a stranger, andespecially if what you are discussing is in your opinion of far toolittle importance for such exceptional solemnity. But in brief andcoherent phrases Raskolnikov explained his business clearly andexactly, and was so well satisfied with himself that he even succeededin taking a good look at Porfiry. Porfiry Petrovitch did not once takehis eyes off him. Razumihin, sitting opposite at the same table,listened warmly and impatiently, looking from one to the other everymoment with rather excessive interest.

　　"Fool," Raskolnikov swore to himself.

　　"You have to give information to the police," Porfiry replied,with a most businesslike air, "that having learnt of this incident,that is of the murder, you beg to inform the lawyer in charge of thecase that such and such things belong to you, and that you desire toredeem them... or... but they will write to you."

　　"That's just the point, that at the present moment," Raskolnikovtried his utmost to feign embarrassment, "I am not quite in funds...and even this trifling sum is beyond me... I only wanted, you see, forthe present to declare that the things are mine, and that when Ihave money...."

　　"That's no matter," answered Porfiry Petrovitch, receiving hisexplanation of his pecuniary position coldly, "but you can, if youprefer, write straight to me, to say, that having been informed of thematter, and claiming such and such as your property, you beg..."

　　"On an ordinary sheet of paper?" Raskolnikov interrupted eagerly,again interested in the financial side of the question.

　　"Oh, the most ordinary," and suddenly Porfiry Petrovitch looked withobvious irony at him, screwing up his eyes and as it were winking athim. But perhaps it was Raskolnikov's fancy, for it all lasted but amoment. There was certainly something of the sort, Raskolnikov couldhave sworn he winked at him, goodness knows why.

　　"He knows," flashed through his mind like lightning.

　　"Forgive my troubling you about such trifles," he went on, alittle disconcerted, "the things are only worth five roubles, but Iprize them particularly for the sake of those from whom they came tome, and I must confess that I was alarmed when I heard..."

　　"That's why you were so much struck when I mentioned to Zossimovthat Porfiry was inquiring for every one who had pledges!" Razumihinput in with obvious intention.

　　This was really unbearable. Raskolnikov could not help glancing athim with a flash of vindictive anger in his black eyes, butimmediately recollected himself.

　　"You seem to be jeering at me, brother?" he said to him, with awell-feigned irritability. "I dare say I do seem to you absurdlyanxious about such trash; but you mustn't think me selfish or graspingfor that, and these two things may be anything but trash in my eyes. Itold you just now that the silver watch, though it's not worth a cent,is the only thing left us of my father's. You may laugh at me, butmy mother is here," he turned suddenly to Porfiry, "and if sheknew," he turned again hurriedly to Razumihin, carefully making hisvoice tremble, "that the watch was lost, she would be in despair!You know what women are!"

　　"Not a bit of it! I didn't mean that at all! Quite the contrary!"shouted Razumihin distressed.

　　"Was it right? Was it natural? Did I overdo it?" Raskolnikov askedhimself in a tremor. "Why did I say that about women?"

　　"Oh, your mother is with you?" Porfiry Petrovitch inquired.

　　"Yes."

　　"When did she come?"

　　"Last night."

　　Porfiry paused as though reflecting.

　　"Your things would not in any case be lost," he went on calmly andcoldly. "I have been expecting you here for some time."

　　And as though that was a matter of no importance, he carefullyoffered the ash-tray to Razumihin, who was ruthlessly scatteringcigarette ash over the carpet. Raskolnikov shuddered, but Porfirydid not seem to be looking at him, and was still concerned withRazumihin's cigarette.

　　"What? Expecting him? Why, did you know that he had pledgesthere?" cried Razumihin.

　　Porfiry Petrovitch addressed himself to Raskolnikov.

　　"Your things, the ring and the watch, were wrapped up together,and on the paper your name was legibly written in pencil, togetherwith the date on which you left them with her..."

　　"How observant you are!" Raskolnikov smiled awkwardly, doing hisvery utmost to look him straight in the face, but he failed, andsuddenly added:

　　"I say that because I suppose there were a great many pledges...that it must be difficult to remember them all.... But you rememberthem all so clearly, and... and..."

　　"Stupid! Feeble!" he thought. "Why did I add that?"

　　"But we know all who had pledges, and you are the only one whohasn't come forward," Porfiry answered with hardly perceptible irony.

　　"I haven't been quite well."

　　"I heard that too. I heard, indeed, that you were in greatdistress about something. You look pale still."

　　"I am not pale at all.... No, I am quite well," Raskolnikovsnapped out rudely and angrily, completely changing his tone. Hisanger was mounting, he could not repress it. "And in my anger Ishall betray myself," flashed through his mind again. "Why are theytorturing me?"

　　"Not quite well!" Razumihin caught him up. "What next! He wasunconscious and delirious all yesterday. Would you believe, Porfiry,as soon as our backs were turned, he dressed, though he could hardlystand, and gave us the slip and went off on a spree somewhere tillmidnight, delirious all the time! Would you believe it!Extraordinary!"

　　"Really delirious? You don't say so!" Porfiry shook his head in awomanish way.

　　"Nonsense! Don't you believe it! But you don't believe it anyway,"Raskolnikov let slip in his anger. But Porfiry Petrovitch did not seemto catch those strange words.

　　"But how could you have gone out if you hadn't been delirious?"Razumihin got hot suddenly. "What did you go out for? What was theobject of it? And why on the sly? Were you in your senses when you didit? Now that all danger is over I can speak plainly."

　　"I was awfully sick of them yesterday." Raskolnikov addressedPorfiry suddenly with a smile of insolent defiance, "I ran away fromthem to take lodgings where they wouldn't find me, and took a lot ofmoney with me. Mr. Zametov there saw it. I say, Mr. Zametov, was Isensible or delirious yesterday; settle our dispute."

　　He could have strangled Zametov at that moment, so hated were hisexpression and his silence to him.

　　"In my opinion you talked sensibly and even artfully, but you wereextremely irritable," Zametov pronounced dryly.

　　"And Nikodim Fomitch was telling me to-day," put in PorfiryPetrovitch, "that he met you very late last night in the lodging ofa man who had been run over."

　　"And there," said Razumihin, "weren't you mad then? You gave yourlast penny to the widow for the funeral. If you wanted to help, givefifteen or twenty even, but keep three roubles for yourself atleast, but he flung away all the twenty-five at once!"

　　"Maybe I found a treasure somewhere and you know nothing of it? Sothat's why I was liberal yesterday.... Mr. Zametov knows I've founda treasure! Excuse us, please, for disturbing you for half an hourwith such trivialities," he said turning to Porfiry Petrovitch, withtrembling lips. "We are boring you, aren't we?"

　　"Oh no, quite the contrary, quite the contrary! If only you knew howyou interest me! It's interesting to look on and listen... and I amreally glad you have come forward at last."

　　"But you might give us some tea! My throat's dry," cried Razumihin.

　　"Capital idea! Perhaps we will all keep you company. Wouldn't youlike... something more essential before tea?"

　　"Get along with you!"

　　Porfiry Petrovitch went out to order tea.

　　Raskolnikov's thoughts were in a whirl. He was in terribleexasperation.

　　"The worst of it is they don't disguise it; they don't care to standon ceremony! And how if you didn't know me at all, did you come totalk to Nikodim Fomitch about me? So they didn't care to hide thatthey are tracking me like a pack of dogs. They simply spit in myface." He was shaking with rage. "Come, strike me openly, don't playwith me like a cat with a mouse. It's hardly civil, PorfiryPetrovitch, but perhaps I won't allow it! I shall get up and throw thewhole truth in your ugly faces, and you'll see how I despise you."He could hardly breathe. "And what if it's only my fancy? What if I ammistaken, and through inexperience I get angry and don't keep up mynasty part? Perhaps it's all unintentional. All their phrases arethe usual ones, but there is something about them.... It all mightbe said, but there is something. Why did he say bluntly, 'With her'?Why did Zametov add that I spoke artfully? Why do they speak in thattone? Yes, the tone.... Razumihin is sitting here, why does he seenothing? That innocent blockhead never does see anything! Feverishagain! Did Porfiry wink at me just now? Of course it's nonsense!What could he wink for? Are they trying to upset my nerves or are theyteasing me? Either it's ill fancy or they know! Even Zametov isrude.... Is Zametov rude? Zametov has changed his mind. I foresaw hewould change his mind! He is at home here, while it's my firstvisit. Porfiry does not consider him a visitor; sits with his backto him. They're as thick as thieves, no doubt, over me! Not a doubtthey were talking about me before we came. Do they know about theflat? If only they'd make haste! When I said that I ran away to take aflat he let it pass.... I put that in cleverly about a flat, it may beof use afterwards.... Delirious, indeed... ha-ha-ha! He knows allabout last night! He didn't know of my mother's arrival! The hag hadwritten the date on in pencil! You are wrong, you won't catch me!There are no facts... it's all supposition! You produce facts! Theflat even isn't a fact but delirium. I know what to say to them.... Dothey know about the flat? I won't go without finding out. What did Icome for? But my being angry now, maybe is a fact! Fool, how irritableI am! Perhaps that's right; to play the invalid.... He is feelingme. He will try to catch me. Why did I come?"

　　All this flashed like lightning through his mind.

　　Porfiry Petrovitch returned quickly. He became suddenly more jovial.

　　"Your party yesterday, brother, has left my head rather.... And I amout of sorts altogether," he began in quite a different tone, laughingto Razumihin.

　　"Was it interesting? I left you yesterday at the most interestingpoint. Who got the best of it?"

　　"Oh, no one, of course. They got on to everlasting questions,floated off into space."

　　"Only fancy, Rodya, what we got on to yesterday. Whether there issuch a thing as crime. I told you that we talked our heads off."

　　"What is there strange? It's an everyday social question,"Raskolnikov answered casually.

　　"The question wasn't put quite like that," observed Porfiry.

　　"Not quite, that's true," Razumihin agreed at once, getting warm andhurried as usual. "Listen, Rodion, and tell us your opinion, I want tohear it. I was fighting tooth and nail with them and wanted you tohelp me. I told them you were coming.... It began with the socialistdoctrine. You know their doctrine; crime is a protest against theabnormality of the social organization and nothing more, and nothingmore; no other causes admitted!..."

　　"You are wrong there," cried Porfiry Petrovitch; he was noticeablyanimated and kept laughing as he looked at Razumihin which made himmore excited than ever.

　　"Nothing is admitted," Razumihin interrupted with heat.

　　"I am not wrong. I'll show you their pamphlets. Everything with themis 'the influence of environment,' and nothing else. Their favouritephrase! From which it follows that, if society is normallyorganized, all crime will cease at once, since there will be nothingto protest against and all men will become righteous in one instant.Human nature is not taken into account, it is excluded, it's notsupposed to exist! They don't recognise that humanity, developing by ahistorical living process, will become at last a normal society, butthey believe that a social system that has come out of somemathematical brain is going to organise all humanity at once andmake it just and sinless in an instant, quicker than any livingprocess! That's why they instinctively dislike history, 'nothing butugliness and stupidity in it,' and they explain it all as stupidity!That's why they so dislike the living process of life; they don't wanta living soul! The living soul demands life, the soul won't obey therules of mechanics, the soul is an object of suspicion, the soul isretrograde! But what they want though it smells of death and can bemade of India-rubber, at least is not alive, has no will, is servileand won't revolt! And it comes in the end to their reducing everythingto the building of walls and the planning of rooms and passages in aphalanstery! The phalanstery is ready, indeed, but your human natureis not ready for the phalanstery- it wants life, it hasn't completedits vital process, it's too soon for the graveyard! You can't skipover nature by logic. Logic presupposes three possibilities, but thereare millions! Cut away a million, and reduce it all to the question ofcomfort! That's the easiest solution of the problem! It'sseductively clear and you musn't think about it. That's the greatthing, you mustn't think! The whole secret of life in two pages ofprint!"

　　"Now he is off, beating the drum! Catch hold of him, do!" laughedPorfiry. "Can you imagine," he turned to Raskolnikov, "six peopleholding forth like that last night, in one room, with punch as apreliminary! No, brother, you are wrong, environment accounts for agreat deal in crime; I can assure you of that."

　　"Oh, I know it does, but just tell me: a man of forty violates achild of ten; was it environment drove him to it?"

　　"Well, strictly speaking, it did," Porfiry observed withnoteworthy gravity; "a crime of that nature may be very wellascribed to the influence of environment."

　　Razumihin was almost in a frenzy. "Oh, if you like," he roared."I'll prove to you that your white eyelashes may very well be ascribedto the Church of Ivan the Great's being two hundred and fifty feethigh, and I will prove it clearly, exactly, progressively, and evenwith a Liberal tendency! I undertake to! Will you bet on it?"

　　"Done! Let's hear, please, how he will prove it!"

　　"He is always humbugging, confound him," cried Razumihin, jumping upand gesticulating. "What's the use of talking to you! He does all thaton purpose; you don't know him, Rodion! He took their sideyesterday, simply to make fools of them. And the things he saidyesterday! And they were delighted! He can keep it up for afortnight together. Last year he persuaded us that he was going into amonastery: he stuck to it for two months. Not long ago he took it intohis head to declare he was going to get married, that he hadeverything ready for the wedding. He ordered new clothes indeed. Weall began to congratulate him. There was no bride, nothing, all purefantasy!"

　　"Ah, you are wrong! I got the clothes before. It was the new clothesin fact that made me think of taking you in."

　　"Are you such a good dissembler?" Raskolnikov asked carelessly.

　　"You wouldn't have supposed it, eh? Wait a bit, I shall take you in,too. Ha-ha-ha! No, I'll tell you the truth. All these questionsabout crime, environment, children, recall to my mind an article ofyours which interested me at the time. 'On Crime'... or something ofthe sort, I forget the title, I read it with pleasure two months agoin the Periodical Review."

　　"My article? In the Periodical Review?" Raskolnikov asked inastonishment. "I certainly did write an article upon a book six monthsago when I left the university, but I sent it to the Weekly Review."

　　"But it came out in the Periodical."

　　"And the Weekly Review ceased to exist, so that's why it wasn'tprinted at the time."

　　"That's true; but when it ceased to exist, the Weekly Review wasamalgamated with the Periodical, and so your article appeared twomonths ago in the latter. Didn't you know?"

　　Raskolnikov had not known.

　　"Why, you might get some money out of them for the article! What astrange person you are! You lead such a solitary life that you knownothing of matters that concern you directly. It's a fact, I assureyou."

　　"Bravo, Rodya! I knew nothing about it either!" cried Razumihin."I'll run to-day to the reading-room and ask for the number. Twomonths ago? What was the date? It doesn't matter though, I will findit. Think of not telling us!"

　　"How did you find out that the article was mine? It's only signedwith an initial."

　　"I only learnt it by chance, the other day. Through the editor; Iknow him.... I was very much interested."

　　"It analysed, if I remember, the psychology of a criminal before andafter the crime."

　　"Yes, and you maintained that the perpetration of a crime isalways accompanied by illness. Very, very original, but... it wasnot that part of your article that interested me so much, but anidea at the end of the article which I regret to say you merelysuggested without working it out clearly. There is, if yourecollect, a suggestion that there are certain persons who can... thatis, not precisely are able to, but have a perfect right to commitbreaches of morality and crimes, and that the law is not for them."

　　Raskolnikov smiled at the exaggerated and intentional distortionof his idea.

　　"What? What do you mean? A right to crime? But not because of theinfluence of environment?" Razumihin inquired with some alarm even.

　　"No, not exactly because of it," answered Porfiry. "In his articleall men are divided into 'ordinary' and 'extraordinary.' Ordinarymen have to live in submission, have no right to transgress the law,because, don't you see, they are ordinary. But extraordinary menhave a right to commit any crime and to transgress the law in any way,just because they are extraordinary. That was your idea, if I am notmistaken?"

　　"What do you mean? That can't be right?" Razumihin muttered inbewilderment.

　　Raskolnikov smiled again. He saw the point at once, and knew wherethey wanted to drive him. He decided to take up the challenge.

　　"That wasn't quite my contention," he began simply and modestly."Yet I admit that you have stated it almost correctly; perhaps, if youlike, perfectly so." (It almost gave him pleasure to admit this.) "Theonly difference is that I don't contend that extraordinary peopleare always bound to commit breaches of morals, as you call it. Infact, I doubt whether such an argument could be published. I simplyhinted that an 'extraordinary' man has the right... that is not anofficial right, but an inner right to decide in his own conscienceto overstep... certain obstacles, and only in case it is essential forthe practical fulfilment of his idea (sometimes, perhaps, of benefitto the whole of humanity). You say that my article isn't definite; Iam ready to make it as clear as I can. Perhaps I am right inthinking you want me to; very well. I maintain that if the discoveriesof Kepler and Newton could not have been made known except bysacrificing the lives of one, a dozen, a hundred, or more men,Newton would have had the right, would indeed have been in dutybound... to eliminate the dozen or the hundred men for the sake ofmaking his discoveries known to the whole of humanity. But it does notfollow from that that Newton had a right to murder people right andleft and to steal every day in the market. Then, I remember, Imaintain in my article that all... well, legislators and leaders ofmen, such as Lycurgus, Solon, Mahomet, Napoleon, and so on, were allwithout exception criminals, from the very fact that, making a newlaw, they transgressed the ancient one, handed down from theirancestors and held sacred by the people, and they did not stop shortat bloodshed either, if that bloodshed- often of innocent personsfighting bravely in defence of ancient law- were of use to theircause. It's remarkable, in fact, that the majority, indeed, of thesebenefactors and leaders of humanity were guilty of terrible carnage.In short, I maintain that all great men or even men a little out ofthe common, that is to say capable of giving some new word, mustfrom their very nature be criminals- more or less, of course.Otherwise it's hard for them to get out of the common rut; and toremain in the common rut is what they can't submit to, from their verynature again, and to my mind they ought not, indeed, to submit toit. You see that there is nothing particularly new in all that. Thesame thing has been printed and read a thousand times before. As formy division of people into ordinary and extraordinary, I acknowledgethat it's somewhat arbitrary, but I don't insist upon exact numbers. Ionly believe in my leading idea that men are in general divided by alaw of nature into two categories, inferior (ordinary), that is, so tosay, material that serves only to reproduce its kind, and men who havethe gift or the talent to utter a new word. There are, of course,innumerable sub-divisions, but the distinguishing features of bothcategories are fairly well marked. The first category, generallyspeaking, are men conservative in temperament and law-abiding; theylive under control and love to be controlled. To my thinking it istheir duty to be controlled, because that's their vocation, andthere is nothing humiliating in it for them. The second category alltransgress the law; they are destroyers or disposed to destructionaccording to their capacities. The crimes of these men are of courserelative and varied; for the most part they seek in very varied waysthe destruction of the present for the sake of the better. But if sucha one is forced for the sake of his idea to step over a corpse or wadethrough blood, he can, I maintain, find within himself, in hisconscience, a sanction for wading through blood- that depends on theidea and its dimensions, note that. It's only in that sense I speak oftheir right to crime in my article (you remember it began with thelegal question). There's no need for such anxiety, however; the masseswill scarcely ever admit this right, they punish them or hang them(more or less), and in doing so fulfil quite justly their conservativevocation. But the same masses set these criminals on a pedestal in thenext generation and worship them (more or less). The first category isalways the man of the present, the second the man of the future. Thefirst preserve the world and people it, the second move the worldand lead it to its goal. Each class has an equal right to exist. Infact, all have equal rights with me- and vive la guerre eternelle-till the New Jerusalem, of course!"

　　"Then you believe in the New Jerusalem, do you?"

　　"I do," Raskolnikov answered firmly; as he said these words andduring the whole preceding tirade he kept his eyes on one spot onthe carpet.

　　"And... and do you believe in God? Excuse my curiosity."

　　"I do," repeated Raskolnikov, raising his eyes to Porfiry.

　　"And... do you believe in Lazarus' rising from the dead?"

　　"I... I do. Why do you ask all this?"

　　"You believe it literally?"

　　"Literally."

　　"You don't say so.... I asked from curiosity. Excuse me. But letus go back to the question; they are not always executed. Some, on thecontrary..."

　　"Triumph in their lifetime? Oh, yes, some attain their ends inthis life, and then..."

　　"They begin executing other people?"

　　"If it's necessary; indeed, for the most part they do. Your remarkis very witty."

　　"Thank you. But tell me this: how do you distinguish thoseextraordinary people from the ordinary ones? Are there signs attheir birth? I feel there ought to be more exactitude, more externaldefinition. Excuse the natural anxiety of a practical law-abidingcitizen, but couldn't they adopt a special uniform, for instance,couldn't they wear something, be branded in some way? For you knowif confusion arises and a member of one category imagines that hebelongs to the other, begins to 'eliminate obstacles,' as you sohappily expressed it, then..."

　　"Oh, that very often happens! That remark is wittier than theother."

　　"Thank you."

　　"No reason to; but take note that the mistake can only arise inthe first category, that is among the ordinary people (as I perhapsunfortunately called them). In spite of their predisposition toobedience very many of them, through a playfulness of nature,sometimes vouchsafed even to the cow, like to imagine themselvesadvanced people, 'destroyers,' and to push themselves into the 'newmovement,' and this quite sincerely. Meanwhile the really new peopleare very often unobserved by them, or even despised as reactionariesof grovelling tendencies. But I don't think there is anyconsiderable danger here, and you really need not be uneasy for theynever go very far. Of course, they might have a thrashing sometimesfor letting their fancy run away with them and to teach them theirplace, but no more; in fact, even this isn't necessary as theycastigate themselves, for they are very conscientious: some performthis service for one another and others chastise themselves with theirown hands.... They will impose various public acts of penitence uponthemselves with a beautiful and edifying effect; in fact you'venothing to be uneasy about.... It's a law of nature."

　　"Well, you have certainly set my mind more at rest on that score;but there's another thing worries me. Tell me, please, are theremany people who have the right to kill others, these extraordinarypeople? I am ready to bow down to them, of course, but you mustadmit it's alarming if there are a great many of them, eh?"

　　"Oh, you needn't worry about that either," Raskolnikov went on inthe same tone. "People with new ideas, people with the faintestcapacity for saying something new, are extremely few in number,extraordinarily so in fact. One thing only is clear, that theappearance of all these grades and sub-divisions of men must followwith unfailing regularity some law of nature. That law, of course,is unknown at present, but I am convinced that it exists, and oneday may become known. The vast mass of mankind is mere material, andonly exists in order by some great effort, by some mysterious process,by means of some crossing of races and stocks, to bring into the worldat last perhaps one man out of a thousand with a spark ofindependence. One in ten thousand perhaps- I speak roughly,approximately- is born with some independence, and with stillgreater independence one in a hundred thousand. The man of genius isone of millions, and the great geniuses, the crown of humanity, appearon earth perhaps one in many thousand millions. In fact I have notpeeped into the retort in which all this takes place. But therecertainly is and must be a definite law, it cannot be a matter ofchance."

　　"Why, are you both joking?" Razumihin cried at last. "There you sit,making fun of one another. Are you serious, Rodya?"

　　Raskolnikov raised his pale and almost mournful face and made noreply. And the unconcealed, persistent, nervous, and discourteoussarcasm of Porfiry seemed strange to Razumihin beside that quiet andmournful face.

　　"Well, brother, if you are really serious... You are right, ofcourse, in saying that it's not new, that it's like what we've readand heard a thousand times already; but what is really original in allthis, and is exclusively your own, to my horror, is that yousanction bloodshed in the name of conscience, and, excuse my sayingso, with such fanaticism.... That, I take it, is the point of yourarticle. But that sanction of bloodshed by conscience is to my mind...more terrible than the official, legal sanction of bloodshed...."

　　"You are quite right, it is more terrible," Porfiry agreed.

　　"Yes, you must have exaggerated! There is some mistake, I shall readit. You can't think that! I shall read it."

　　"All that is not in the article, there's only a hint of it," saidRaskolnikov.

　　"Yes, yes." Porfiry couldn't sit still. "Your attitude to crime ispretty clear to me now, but... excuse me for my impertinence (I amreally ashamed to be worrying you like this), you see, you'veremoved my anxiety as to the two grades' getting mixed, but... thereare various practical possibilities that make me uneasy! What ifsome man or youth imagines that he is a Lycurgus or Mahomet- afuture one of course- and suppose he begins to remove allobstacles.... He has some great enterprise before him and needsmoney for it... and tries to get it... do you see?"

　　Zametov gave a sudden guffaw in his corner. Raskolnikov did not evenraise his eyes to him.

　　"I must admit," he went on calmly, "that such cases certainly mustarise. The vain and foolish are particularly apt to fall into thatsnare; young people especially."

　　"Yes, you see. Well then?"

　　"What then?" Raskolnikov smiled in reply; "that's not my fault. Soit is and so it always will be. He said just now (he nodded atRazumihin) that I sanction bloodshed. Society is too well protected byprisons, banishment, criminal investigators, penal servitude.There's no need to be uneasy. You have but to catch the thief."

　　"And what if we do catch him?"

　　"Then he gets what he deserves."

　　"You are certainly logical. But what of his conscience?"

　　"Why do you care about that?"

　　"Simply from humanity."

　　"If he has a conscience he will suffer for his mistake. That will behis punishment- as well as the prison."

　　"But the real geniuses," asked Razumihin frowning, "those who havethe right to murder? Oughtn't they to suffer at all even for the bloodthey've shed?"

　　"Why the word ought? It's not a matter of permission or prohibition.He will suffer if he is sorry for his victim. Pain and suffering arealways inevitable for a large intelligence and a deep heart. Thereally great men must, I think, have great sadness on earth," he addeddreamily, not in the tone of the conversation.

　　He raised his eyes, looked earnestly at them all, smiled, and tookhis cap. He was too quiet by comparison with his manner at hisentrance, and he felt this. Every one got up.

　　"Well, you may abuse me, be angry with me if you like," PorfiryPetrovitch began again, "but I can't resist. Allow me one littlequestion (I know I am troubling you). There is just one littlenotion I want to express, simply that I may not forget it."

　　"Very good, tell me your little notion," Raskolnikov stoodwaiting, pale and grave before him.

　　"Well, you see... I really don't know how to express it properly....It's a playful, psychological idea.... When you were writing yourarticle, surely you couldn't have helped, he-he, fancyingyourself... just a little, an 'extraordinary' man, uttering a new wordin your sense.... That's so, isn't it?"

　　"Quite possibly," Raskolnikov answered contemptuously.

　　Razumihin made a movement.

　　"And, if so, could you bring yourself in case of worldlydifficulties and hardship or for some service to humanity- to overstepobstacles?... For instance, to rob and murder?"

　　And again he winked with his left eye, and laughed noiselesslyjust as before.

　　"If I did I certainly should not tell you," Raskolnikov answeredwith defiant and haughty contempt.

　　"No, I was only interested on account of your article, from aliterary point of view..."

　　"Foo, how obvious and insolent that is," Raskolnikov thought withrepulsion.

　　"Allow me to observe," he answered dryly, "that I don't considermyself a Mahomet or a Napoleon, nor any personage of that kind, andnot being one of them I cannot tell you how I should act."

　　"Oh, come, don't we all think ourselves Napoleons now in Russia?"Porfiry Petrovitch said with alarming familiarity.

　　Something peculiar betrayed itself in the very intonation of hisvoice.

　　"Perhaps it was one of these future Napoleons who did for AlyonaIvanovna last week?" Zametov blurted out from the corner.

　　Raskolnikov did not speak, but looked firmly and intently atPorfiry. Razumihin was scowling gloomily. He seemed before this tobe noticing something. He looked angrily around. There was a minute ofgloomy silence. Raskolnikov turned to go.

　　"Are you going already?" Porfiry said amiably, holding out hishand with excessive politeness. "Very, very glad of your acquaintance.As for your request, have no uneasiness, write just as I told you, or,better still, come to me there yourself in a day or two...to-morrow, indeed. I shall be there at eleven o'clock for certain.We'll arrange it all; we'll have a talk. As one of the last to bethere, you might perhaps be able to tell us something," he addedwith a most good-natured expression.

　　"You want to cross-examine me officially in due form?" Raskolnikovasked sharply.

　　"Oh, why? That's not necessary for the present. You misunderstandme. I lose no opportunity, you see, and... I've talked with all whohad pledges.... I obtained evidence from some of them, and you are thelast.... Yes, by the way," he cried, seemingly suddenly delighted,"I just remember, what was I thinking of?" he turned to Razumihin,"you were talking my ears off about that Nikolay... of course, I know,I know very well," he turned to Raskolnikov, "that the fellow isinnocent, but what is one to do? We had to trouble Dmitri too.... Thisis the point, this is all: when you went up the stairs it was pastseven, wasn't it?"

　　"Yes," answered Raskolnikov, with an unpleasant sensation at thevery moment he spoke that he need not have said it.

　　"Then when you went upstairs between seven and eight, didn't you seein a flat that stood open on a second storey, do you remember, twoworkmen or at least one of them? They were painting there, didn'tyou notice them? It's very, very important for them."

　　"Painters? No, I didn't see them," Raskolnikov answered slowly, asthough ransacking his memory, while at the same instant he was rackingevery nerve, almost swooning with anxiety to conjecture as quicklyas possible where the trap lay and not to overlook anything. "No, Ididn't see them, and I don't think I noticed a flat like that open....But on the fourth storey" (he had mastered the trap now and wastriumphant) "I remember now that some one was moving out of the flatopposite Alyona Ivanovna's.... I remember... I remember it clearly.Some porters were carrying out a sofa and they squeezed me against thewall. But painters... no, I don't remember that there were anypainters, and I don't think that there was a flat open anywhere, no,there wasn't."

　　"What do you mean?" Razumihin shouted suddenly, as though he hadreflected and realised. "Why, it was on the day of the murder thepainters were at work, and he was there three days before? What areyou asking?"

　　"Foo! I have muddled it!" Porfiry slapped himself on the forehead."Deuce take it! This business is turning my brain!" he addressedRaskolnikov somewhat apologetically. "It would be such a great thingfor us to find out whether any one had seen them between seven andeight at the flat, so I fancied you could perhaps have told ussomething.... I quite muddled it."

　　"Then you should be more careful," Razumihin observed grimly.

　　The last words were uttered in the passage. Porfiry Petrovitch sawthem to the door with excessive politeness.

　　They went out into the street gloomy and sullen, and for somesteps they did not say a word. Raskolnikov drew a deep breath.

　　Chapter Six

　　"I DON'T BELIEVE it, I can't believe it!" repeated Razumihin, tryingin perplexity to refute Raskolnikov's arguments.

　　They were by now approaching Bakaleyev's lodgings, where PulcheriaAlexandrovna and Dounia had been expecting them a long while.Razumihin kept stopping on the way in the heat of discussion, confusedand excited by the very fact that they were for the first timespeaking openly about it.

　　"Don't believe it, then!" answered Raskolnikov, with a cold,careless smile. "You were noticing nothing as usual, but I wasweighing every word."

　　"You are suspicious. That is why you weighed their words... h'm...certainly, I agree, Porfiry's tone was rather strange, and stillmore that wretch Zametov!... You are right, there was somethingabout him- but why? Why?"

　　"He has changed his mind since last night."

　　"Quite the contrary! If they had that brainless idea, they woulddo their utmost to hide it, and conceal their cards, so as to catchyou afterwards.... But it was all impudent and careless."

　　"If they had had facts- I mean, real facts- or at least groundsfor suspicion, then they would certainly have tried to hide theirgame, in the hope of getting more (they would have made a searchlong ago besides). But they have no facts, not one. It is allmirage- all ambiguous. Simply a floating idea. So they try to throw meout by impudence. And perhaps, he was irritated at having no facts,and blurted it out in his vexation- or perhaps he has some plan...he seems an intelligent man. Perhaps he wanted to frighten me bypretending to know. They have a psychology of their own, brother.But it is loathsome explaining it all. Stop!"

　　"And it's insulting, insulting! I understand you. But... since wehave spoken openly now (and it is an excellent thing that we have atlast- I am glad) I will own now frankly that I noticed it in them longago, this idea. Of course the merest hint only- an insinuation- butwhy an insinuation even? How dare they? What foundation have they?If only you knew how furious I have been. Think only! Simply because apoor student, unhinged by poverty and hypochondria, on the eve of asevere delirious illness (note that), suspicious, vain, proud, who hasnot seen a soul to speak to for six months, in rags and in bootswithout soles, has to face some wretched policemen and put up withtheir insolence; and the unexpected debt thrust under his nose, theI.O.U. presented by Tchebarov, the new paint, thirty degrees Reaumurand a stifling atmosphere, a crowd of people, the talk about themurder of a person where he had been just before, and all that on anempty stomach- he might well have a fainting fit! And that, that iswhat they found it all on! Damn them! I understand how annoying it is,but in your place, Rodya, I would laugh at them, or better still, spitin their ugly faces, and spit a dozen times in all directions. I'd hitout in all directions, neatly too, and so I'd put an end to it. Damnthem! Don't be downhearted. It's a shame!"

　　"He really has put it well, though," Raskolnikov thought.

　　"Damn them? But the cross-examination again, to-morrow?" he saidwith bitterness. "Must I really enter into explanations with them? Ifeel vexed as it is that I condescended to speak to Zametovyesterday in the restaurant...."

　　"Damn it! I will go myself to Porfiry. I will squeeze it out of him,as one of the family: he must let me know the ins and outs of itall! And as for Zametov..."

　　"At last he sees through him!" thought Raskolnikov.

　　"Stay!" cried Razumihin, seizing him by the shoulder again. "Stay!you were wrong. I have thought it out. You are wrong! How was that atrap? You say that the question about the workmen was a trap. But ifyou had done that, could you have said you had seen them paintingthe flat... and the workmen? On the contrary, you would have seennothing, even if you had seen it. Who would own it against himself?"

　　"If I had done that thing, I should certainly have said that I hadseen the workmen and the flat." Raskolnikov answered, withreluctance and obvious disgust.

　　"But why speak against yourself?"

　　"Because only peasants, or the most inexperienced novices denyeverything flatly at examinations. If a man is ever so littledeveloped and experienced, he will certainly try to admit all theexternal facts that can't be avoided, but will seek other explanationsof them, will introduce some special, unexpected turn, that willgive them another significance and put them in another light.Porfiry might well reckon that I should be sure to answer so, andsay I had seen them to give an air of truth, and then make someexplanation."

　　"But he would have told you at once, that the workmen could not havebeen there two days before, and that therefore you must have beenthere on the day of the murder at eight o'clock. And so he wouldhave caught you over a detail."

　　"Yes, that is what he was reckoning on, that I should not havetime to reflect, and should be in a hurry to make the most likelyanswer, and so would forget that the workmen could not have been theretwo days before."

　　"But how could you forget it?"

　　"Nothing easier. It is in just such stupid things clever peopleare most easily caught. The more cunning a man is, the less hesuspects that he will be caught in a simple thing. The more cunninga man is, the simpler the trap he must be caught in. Porfiry is notsuch a fool as you think...."

　　"He is a knave then, if that is so!"

　　Raskolnikov could not help laughing. But at the very moment, hewas struck by the strangeness of his own frankness, and theeagerness with which he had made this explanation, though he hadkept up all the preceding conversation with gloomy repulsion,obviously with a motive, from necessity.

　　"I am getting a relish for certain aspects!" he thought tohimself. But almost at the same instant, he became suddenly uneasy, asthough an unexpected and alarming idea had occurred to him. Hisuneasiness kept on increasing. They had just reached the entrance toBakaleyev's.

　　"Go in alone!" said Raskolnikov suddenly. "I will be back directly."

　　"Where are you going? Why, we are just here."

　　"I can't help it.... I will come in half an hour. Tell them."

　　"Say what you like, I will come with you."

　　"You, too, want to torture me!" he screamed, with such bitterirritation, such despair in his eyes that Razumihin's hands dropped.He stood for some time on the steps, looking gloomily at Raskolnikovstriding rapidly away in the direction of his lodging. At last,gritting his teeth and clenching his fist, he swore he would squeezePorfiry like a lemon that very day, and went up the stairs to reassurePulcheria Alexandrovna, who was by now alarmed at their long absence.

　　When Raskolnikov got home, his hair was soaked with sweat and he wasbreathing heavily. He went rapidly up the stairs, walked into hisunlocked room and at once fastened the latch. Then in senseless terrorhe rushed to the corner, to that hole under the paper where he had putthe thing; put his hand in, and for some minutes felt carefully in thehole, in every crack and fold of the paper. Finding nothing, he got upand drew a deep breath. As he was reaching the steps of Bakaleyev's,he suddenly fancied that something, a chain, a stud or even a bit ofpaper in which they had been wrapped with the old woman'shandwriting on it, might somehow have slipped out and been lost insome crack, and then might suddenly turn up as unexpected,conclusive evidence against him.

　　He stood as though lost in thought, and a strange, humiliated,half senseless smile strayed on his lips. He took his cap at lastand went quietly out of the room. His ideas were all tangled. Hewent dreamily through the gateway.

　　"Here he is himself," shouted a loud voice.

　　He raised his head.

　　The porter was standing at the door of his little room and waspointing him out to a short man who looked like an artisan, wearinga long coat and a waistcoat, and looking at a distance remarkably likea woman. He stooped, and his head in a greasy cap hung forward. Fromhis wrinkled flabby face he looked over fifty; his little eyes werelost in fat and they looked out grimly, sternly and discontentedly.

　　"What is it?" Raskolnikov asked, going up to the porter.

　　The man stole a look at him from under his brows and he looked athim attentively, deliberately; then he turned slowly and went out ofthe gate into the street without saying a word.

　　"What is it?" cried Raskolnikov.

　　"Why, he there was asking whether a student lived here, mentionedyour name and whom you lodged with. I saw you coming and pointed youout and he went away. It's funny."

　　The porter too seemed rather puzzled, but not much so, and afterwondering for a moment he turned and went back to his room.

　　Raskolnikov ran after the stranger, and at once caught sight ofhim walking along the other side of the street with the same even,deliberate step with his eyes fixed on the ground, as though inmeditation. He soon overtook him, but for some time walked behind him.At last, moving on to a level with him, he looked at his face. The mannoticed him at once, looked at him quickly, but dropped his eyesagain; and so they walked for a minute side by side without uttering aword.

　　"You were inquiring for me... of the porter?" Raskolnikov said atlast, but in a curiously quiet voice.

　　The man made no answer; he didn't even look at him. Again theywere both silent.

　　"Why do you... come and ask for me... and say nothing.... What's themeaning of it?"

　　Raskolnikov's voice broke and he seemed unable to articulate thewords clearly.

　　The man raised his eyes this time and turned a gloomy sinisterlook at Raskolnikov.

　　"Murderer!" he said suddenly in a quiet but clear and distinctvoice.

　　Raskolnikov went on walking beside him. His legs felt suddenly weak,a cold shiver ran down his spine, and his heart seemed to standstill for a moment, then suddenly began throbbing as though it wereset free. So they walked for about a hundred paces, side by side insilence.

　　The man did not look at him.

　　"What do you mean... what is.... Who is a murderer?" mutteredRaskolnikov hardly audibly.

　　"You are a murderer," the man answered still more articulately andemphatically, with a smile of triumphant hatred, and again he lookedstraight into Raskolnikov's pale face and stricken eyes.

　　They had just reached the crossroads. The man turned to the leftwithout looking behind him. Raskolnikov remained standing, gazingafter him. He saw him turn round fifty paces away and look back at himstill standing there. Raskolnikov could not see clearly, but hefancied that he was again smiling the same smile of cold hatred andtriumph.

　　With slow faltering steps, with shaking knees, Raskolnikov madehis way back to his little garret, feeling chilled all over. He tookoff his cap and put it on the table, and for ten minutes he stoodwithout moving. Then he sank exhausted on the sofa and with a weakmoan of pain he stretched himself on it. So he lay for half an hour.

　　He thought of nothing. Some thoughts or fragments of thoughts,some images without order or coherence floated before his mind-faces of people he had seen in his childhood or met somewhere once,whom he would never have recalled, the belfry of the church at V., thebilliard table in a restaurant and some officers playing billiards,the smell of cigars in some underground tobacco shop, a tavern room, aback staircase quite dark, all sloppy with dirty water and strewn withegg shells, and the Sunday bells floating in from somewhere.... Theimages followed one another, whirling like a hurricane. Some of themhe liked and tried to clutch at, but they faded and all the whilethere was an oppression within him, but it was not overwhelming,sometimes it was even pleasant.... The slight shivering stillpersisted, but that too was an almost pleasant sensation.

　　He heard the hurried footsteps of Razumihin; he closed his eyesand pretended to be asleep. Razumihin opened the door and stood forsome time in the doorway as though hesitating, then he steppedsoftly into the room and went cautiously to the sofa. Raskolnikovheard Nastasya's whisper:

　　"Don't disturb him! Let him sleep. He can have his dinner later."

　　"Quite so," answered Razumihin. Both withdrew carefully and closedthe door. Another half-hour passed. Raskolnikov opened his eyes,turned on his back again, clasping his hands behind his head.

　　"Who is he? Who is that man who sprang out of the earth? Where washe, what did he see? He has seen it all, that's clear. Where was hethen? And from where did he see? Why has he only now sprung out of theearth? And how could he see? Is it possible? Hm..." continuedRaskolnikov, turning cold and shivering, "and the jewel case Nikolayfound behind the door- was that possible? A clue? You miss aninfinitesimal line and you can build it into a pyramid of evidence!A fly flew by and saw it! Is it possible?" He felt with suddenloathing how weak, how physically weak he had become. "I ought to haveknown it," he thought with a bitter smile. "And how dared I, knowingmyself, knowing how I should be, take up an axe and shed blood! Iought to have known beforehand.... Ah, but I did know!" he whisperedin despair. At times he came to a standstill at some thought.

　　"No, those men are not made so. The real Master to whom all ispermitted storms Toulon, makes a massacre in Paris, forgets an army inEgypt, wastes half a million men in the Moscow expedition and gets offwith a jest at Vilna. And altars are set up to him after his death,and so all is permitted. No, such people it seems are not of flesh butof bronze!"

　　One sudden irrelevant idea almost made him laugh. Napoleon, thepyramids, Waterloo, and a wretched skinny old woman, a pawnbroker witha red trunk under her bed- it's a nice hash for Porfiry Petrovitchto digest! How can they digest it! It's too inartistic. "A Napoleoncreep under an old woman's bed! Ugh, how loathsome!"

　　At moments he felt he was raving. He sank into a state of feverishexcitement. "The old woman is of no consequence," he thought, hotlyand incoherently. "The old woman was a mistake perhaps, but she is notwhat matters! The old woman was only an illness.... I was in a hurryto overstep.... I didn't kill a human being, but a principle! I killedthe principle, but I didn't overstep, I stopped on this side.... I wasonly capable of killing. And it seems I wasn't even capable of that...Principle? Why was that fool Razumihin abusing the socialists? Theyare industrious, commercial people; 'the happiness of all' is theircase. No, life is only given to me once and I shall never have itagain; I don't want to wait for 'the happiness of all.' I want to livemyself, or else better not live at all. I simply couldn't pass by mymother starving, keeping my trouble in my pocket while I waited forthe 'happiness of all.' I am putting my little brick into thehappiness of all and so my heart is at peace. Ha-ha! Why have youlet me slip? I only live once, I too want.... Ech, I am an aestheticlouse and nothing more," he added suddenly, laughing like a madman."Yes, I am certainly a louse," he went on, clutching at the idea,gloating over it and playing with it with vindictive pleasure. "In thefirst place, because I can reason that I am one, and secondly, becausefor a month past I have been troubling benevolent Providence,calling it to witness that not for my own fleshly lusts did Iundertake it, but with a grand and noble object- ha-ha! Thirdly,because I aimed at carrying it out as justly as possible, weighing,measuring and calculating. Of all the lice I picked out the mostuseless one and proposed to take from her only as much as I needed forthe first step, no more nor less (so the rest would have gone to amonastery, according to her will, ha-ha!). And what shows that I amutterly a louse," he added, grinding his teeth, "is that I amperhaps viler and more loathsome than the louse I killed, and I feltbeforehand that I should tell myself so after killing her. Cananything be compared with the horror of that! The vulgarity! Theabjectness! I understand the 'prophet' with his sabre, on his steed:Allah commands and 'trembling' creation must obey! The 'prophet' isright, he is right when he sets a battery across the street andblows up the innocent and the guilty without deigning to explain! It'sfor you to obey, trembling creation, and not to have desires, forthat's not for you!... I shall never, never forgive the old woman!"

　　His hair was soaked with sweat, his quivering lips were parched, hiseyes were fixed on the ceiling.

　　"Mother, sister- how I loved them! Why do I hate them now? Yes, Ihate them, I feel a physical hatred for them, I can't bear them nearme.... I went up to my mother and kissed her, I remember.... Toembrace her and think if she only knew... shall I tell her then?That's just what I might do.... She must be the same as I am," headded, straining himself to think, as it were struggling withdelirium. "Ah, how I hate the old woman now! I feel I should killher again if she came to life! Poor Lizaveta! Why did she comein?... It's strange though, why is it I scarcely ever think of her, asthough I hadn't killed her! Lizaveta! Sonia! Poor gentle things,with gentle eyes.... Dear women! Why don't they weep? Why don't theymoan? They give up everything... their eyes are soft and gentle....Sonia, Sonia! Gentle Sonia!"

　　He lost consciousness; it seemed strange to him that he didn'tremember how he got into the street. It was late evening. The twilighthad fallen and the full moon was shining more and more brightly; butthere was a peculiar breathlessness in the air. There were crowds ofpeople in the street; workmen and business people were making theirway home; other people had come out for a walk; there was a smell ofmortar, dust and stagnant water. Raskolnikov walked along, mournfuland anxious; he was distinctly aware of having come out with apurpose, of having to do something in a hurry, but what it was hehad forgotten. Suddenly he stood still and saw a man standing on theother side of the street, beckoning to him. He crossed over to him,but at once the man turned and walked away with his head hanging, asthough he had made no sign to him. "Stay, did he really beckon?"Raskolnikov wondered, but he tried to overtake him. When he was withinten paces he recognised him and was frightened; it was the same manwith stooping shoulders in the long coat. Raskolnikov followed himat a distance; his heart was beating; they went down a turning; theman still did not look round. "Does he know I am following him?"thought Raskolnikov. The man went into the gateway of a big house.Raskolnikov hastened to the gate and looked in to see whether he wouldlook round and sign to him. In the courtyard the man did turn roundand again seemed to beckon him. Raskolnikov at once followed himinto the yard, but the man was gone. He must have gone up the firststaircase. Raskolnikov rushed after him. He heard slow measuredsteps two flights above. The staircase seemed strangely familiar. Hereached the window on the first floor; the moon shone through thepanes with a melancholy and mysterious light; then he reached thesecond floor. Bah! this is the flat where the painters were at work...but how was it he did not recognise it at once? The steps of the manabove had died away. "So he must have stopped or hidden somewhere." Hereached the third storey, should he go on? There was a stillnessthat was dreadful.... But he went on. The sound of his own footstepsscared and frightened him. How dark it was! The man must be hidingin some corner here. Ah! the flat was standing wide open, he hesitatedand went in. It was very dark and empty in the passage, as thougheverything had been removed; he crept on tiptoe into the parlour whichwas flooded with moonlight. Everything there was as before, thechairs, the looking-glass, the yellow sofa and the pictures in theframes. A huge, round, copper-red moon looked in at the windows. "It'sthe moon that makes it so still, weaving some mystery," thoughtRaskolnikov. He stood and waited, waited a long while, and the moresilent the moonlight, the more violently his heart beat, till it waspainful. And still the same hush. Suddenly he heard a momentarysharp crack like the snapping of a splinter and all was still again. Afly flew up suddenly and struck the window pane with a plaintive buzz.At that moment he noticed in the corner between the window and thelittle cupboard something like a cloak hanging on the wall. "Why isthat cloak here?" he thought, "it wasn't there before...." He wentup to it quietly and felt that there was some one hiding behind it. Hecautiously moved the cloak and saw, sitting on a chair in thecorner, the old woman bent double so that he couldn't see her face;but it was she. He stood over her. "She is afraid," he thought. Hestealthily took the axe from the noose and struck her one blow, thenanother on the skull. But strange to say she did not stir, as thoughshe were made of wood. He was frightened, bent down nearer and triedto look at her; but she, too, bent her head lower. He bent rightdown to the ground and peeped up into her face from below, he peepedand turned cold with horror: the old woman was sitting and laughing,shaking with noiseless laughter, doing her utmost that he should nothear it. Suddenly he fancied that the door from the bedroom was openeda little and that there was laughter and whispering within. He wasovercome with frenzy and he began hitting the old woman on the headwith all his force, but at every blow of the axe the laughter andwhispering from the bedroom grew louder and the old woman was simplyshaking with mirth. He was rushing away, but the passage was full ofpeople, the doors of the flats stood open and on the landing, on thestairs and everywhere below there were people, rows of heads, alllooking, but huddled together in silence and expectation. Somethinggripped his heart, his legs were rooted to the spot, they would notmove.... He tried to scream and woke up.

　　He drew a deep breath- but his dream seemed strangely to persist:his door was flung open and a man whom he had never seen stood inthe doorway watching him intently.

　　Raskolnikov had hardly opened his eyes and he instantly closedthem again. He lay on his back without stirring.

　　"Is it still a dream?" he wondered and again raised his eyelidshardly perceptibly; the stranger was standing in the same place, stillwatching him.

　　He stepped cautiously into the room, carefully closing the doorafter him, went up to the table, paused a moment, still keeping hiseyes on Raskolnikov and noiselessly seated himself on the chair by thesofa; he put his hat on the floor beside him and leaned his hands onhis cane and his chin on his hands. It was evident that he wasprepared to wait indefinitely. As far as Raskolnikov could make outfrom his stolen glances, he was a man no longer young, stout, with afull, fair, almost whitish beard.

　　Ten minutes passed. It was still light, but beginning to get dusk.There was complete stillness in the room. Not a sound came from thestairs. Only a big fly buzzed and fluttered against the window pane.It was unbearable at last. Raskolnikov suddenly got up and sat onthe sofa.

　　"Come, tell me what you want."

　　"I knew you were not asleep, but only pretending," the strangeranswered oddly, laughing calmly. "Arkady Ivanovitch Svidrigailov,allow me to introduce myself...."

　　PART FOUR

　　Chapter One

　　"CAN this be still a dream?" Raskolnikov thought once more.

　　He looked carefully and suspiciously at the unexpected visitor.

　　"Svidrigailov! What nonsense! It can't be!" he said at last aloud inbewilderment.

　　His visitor did not seem at all surprised at this exclamation.

　　"I've come to you for two reasons. In the first place, I wanted tomake your personal acquaintance, as I have already heard a greatdeal about you that is interesting and flattering; secondly, I cherishthe hope that you may not refuse to assist me in a matter directlyconcerning the welfare of your sister, Avdotya Romanovna. Forwithout your support she might not let me come near her now, for sheis prejudiced against me, but with your assistance I reckon on..."

　　"You reckon wrongly," interrupted Raskolnikov.

　　"They only arrived yesterday, may I ask you?"

　　Raskolnikov made no reply.

　　"It was yesterday, I know. I only arrived myself the day before.Well, let me tell you this, Rodion Romanovitch, I don't consider itnecessary to justify myself, but kindly tell me what was thereparticularly criminal on my part in all this business, speakingwithout prejudice, with common sense?"

　　Raskolnikov continued to look at him in silence.

　　"That in my own house I persecuted a defenceless girl and'insulted her with my infamous proposals'- is that it? (I amanticipating you.) But you've only to assume that I, too, am a manet nihil humanum... in a word, that I am capable of being attractedand falling in love (which does not depend on our will), theneverything can be explained in the most natural manner. The questionis, am I a monster, or am I myself a victim? And what if I am avictim? In proposing to the object of my passion to elope with me toAmerica or Switzerland, I may have cherished the deepest respect forher, and may have thought that I was promoting our mutual happiness!Reason is the slave of passion, you know; why, probably, I was doingmore harm to myself than any one!"

　　"But that's not the point," Raskolnikov interrupted with disgust."It's simply that whether you are right or wrong, we dislike you. Wedon't want to have anything to do with you. We show you the door. Goout!"

　　Svidrigailov broke into a sudden laugh.

　　"But you're... but there's no getting round you," he said,laughing in the frankest way. "I hoped to get round you, but youtook up the right line at once!"

　　"But you are trying to get round me still!"

　　"What of it? What of it?" cried Svidrigailov, laughing openly."But this is what the French call bonne guerre, and the mostinnocent form of deception!... But still you have interrupted me;one way or another, I repeat again: there would never have been anyunpleasantness except for what happened in the garden. MarfaPetrovna..."

　　"You have got rid of Marfa Petrovna, too, so they say?"Raskolnikov interrupted rudely.

　　"Oh, you've heard that, too, then? You'd be sure to, though....But as for your question, I really don't know what to say, though myown conscience is quite at rest on that score. Don't suppose that I amin any apprehension about it. All was regular and in order; themedical inquiry diagnosed apoplexy due to bathing immediately aftera heavy dinner and a bottle of wine, and indeed it could have provednothing else. But I'll tell you what I have been thinking to myself oflate, on my way here in the train, especially: didn't I contributeto all that... calamity, morally, in a way, by irritation or somethingof the sort. But I came to the conclusion that that, too, was quiteout of the question."

　　Raskolnikov laughed.

　　"I wonder you trouble yourself about it!"

　　"But what are you laughing at? Only consider, I struck her justtwice with a switch- there were no marks even... don't regard me asa cynic, please; I am perfectly aware how atrocious it was of me andall that; but I know for certain, too, that Marfa Petrovna was verylikely pleased at my, so to say, warmth. The story of your sisterhad been wrung out to the last drop; for the last three days MarfaPetrovna had been forced to sit at home; she had nothing to showherself with in the town. Besides, she had bored them so with thatletter (you heard about her reading the letter). And all of a suddenthose two switches fell from heaven! Her first act was to order thecarriage to be got out.... Not to speak of the fact that there arecases when women are very, very glad to be insulted in spite of alltheir show of indignation. There are instances of it with every one;human beings in general, indeed, greatly love to be insulted, have younoticed that? But it's particularly so with women. One might evensay it's their only amusement."

　　At one time Raskolnikov thought of getting up and walking out and sofinishing the interview. But some curiosity and even a sort ofprudence made him linger for a moment.

　　"You are fond of fighting?" he asked carelessly.

　　"No, not very," Svidrigailov answered, calmly. "And Marfa Petrovnaand I scarcely ever fought. We lived very harmoniously, and she wasalways pleased with me. I only used the whip twice in all our sevenyears (not counting a third occasion of a very ambiguous character).The first time, two months after our marriage, immediately after wearrived in the country, and the last time was that of which we arespeaking. Did you suppose I was such a monster, such a reactionary,such a slave driver? Ha, ha! By the way, do you remember, RodionRomanovitch, how a few years ago, in those days of beneficentpublicity, a nobleman, I've forgotten his name, was put to shameeverywhere, in all the papers, for having thrashed a German woman inthe railway train. You remember? It was in those days, that veryyear I believe, the 'disgraceful action of the Age' took place (youknow, 'The Egyptian Nights,' that public reading, you remember? Thedark eyes, you know! Ah, the golden days of our youth, where arethey?). Well, as for the gentleman who thrashed the German, I feelno sympathy with him, because after all what need is there forsympathy? But I must say that there are sometimes such provoking'Germans' that I don't believe there is a progressive who couldquite answer for himself. No one looked at the subject from that pointof view then, but that's the truly humane point of view, I assureyou."

　　After saying this, Svidrigailov broke into a sudden laugh again.Raskolnikov saw clearly that this was a man with a firm purpose in hismind and able to keep it to himself.

　　"I expect you've not talked to any one for some days?" he asked.

　　"Scarcely any one. I suppose you are wondering at my being such anadaptable man?"

　　"No, I am only wondering at your being too adaptable a man."

　　"Because I am not offended at the rudeness of your questions? Isthat it? But why take offence? As you asked, so I answered," hereplied, with a surprising expression of simplicity. "You know,there's hardly anything I take interest in," he went on, as it weredreamily, "especially now, I've nothing to do.... You are quite atliberty to imagine though that I am making up to you with a motive,particularly as I told you I want to see your sister aboutsomething. But I'll confess frankly, I am very much bored. The lastthree days especially, so I am delighted to see you.... Don't beangry, Rodion Romanovitch, but you seem to be somehow awfullystrange yourself. Say what you like, there's something wrong with you,and now, too... not this very minute, I mean, but now, generally....Well, well, I won't, I won't, don't scowl! I am not such a bear, youknow, as you think."

　　Raskolnikov looked gloomily at him.

　　"You are not a bear, perhaps, at all," he said. "I fancy indeed thatyou are a man of very good breeding, or at least know how onoccasion to behave like one."

　　"I am not particularly interested in any one's opinion,"Svidrigailov answered, dryly and even with a shade of haughtiness,"and therefore why not be vulgar at times when vulgarity is such aconvenient cloak for our climate... and especially if one has anatural propensity that way," he added, laughing again.

　　"But I've heard you have many friends here. You are, as they say,'not without connections.' What can you want with me, then, unlessyou've some special object?"

　　"That's true that I have friends here," Svidrigailov admitted, notreplying to the chief point. "I've met some already. I've beenlounging about for the last three days, and I've seen them, or they'veseen me. That's a matter of course. I am well dressed and reckoned nota poor man; the emancipation of the serfs hasn't affected me; myproperty consists chiefly of forests and water meadows. The revenuehas not fallen off; but... I am not going to see them, I was sick ofthem long ago. I've been here three days and have called on no one....What a town it is! How has it come into existence among us, tell methat? A town of officials and students of all sorts. Yes, there's agreat deal I didn't notice when I was here eight years ago, kicking upmy heels.... My only hope now is in anatomy, by Jove, it is!"

　　"Anatomy?"

　　"But as for these clubs, Dussauts, parades, or progress, indeed, maybe- well, all that can go on without me," he went on, again withoutnoticing the question. "Besides, who wants to be a card-sharper?"

　　"Why, have you been a card-sharper then?"

　　"How could I help being? There was a regular set of us, men of thebest society, eight years ago; we had a fine time. And all men ofbreeding, you know, poets, men of property. And indeed as a rule inour Russian society, the best manners are found among those who'vebeen thrashed, have you noticed that? I've deteriorated in thecountry. But I did get into prison for debt, through a low Greek whocame from Nezhin. Then Marfa Petrovna turned up; she bargained withhim and bought me off for thirty thousand silver pieces (I owedseventy thousand). We were united in lawful wedlock and she bore meoff into the country like a treasure. You know she was five yearsolder than I. She was very fond of me. For seven years I never leftthe country. And, take note, that all my life she held a document overme, the I.O.U. for thirty thousand roubles, so if I were to elect tobe restive about anything I should be trapped at once! And she wouldhave done it! Women find nothing incompatible in that."

　　"If it hadn't been for that, would you have given her the slip?"

　　"I don't know what to say. It was scarcely the document restrainedme. I didn't want to go anywhere else. Marfa Petrovna herselfinvited me to go abroad, seeing I was bored, but I've been abroadbefore, and always felt sick there. For no reason, but the sunrise,the bay of Naples, the sea- you look at them and it makes you sad.What's most revolting is that one is really sad! No, it's better athome. Here at least one blames others for everything and excusesoneself. I should have gone perhaps on an expedition to the NorthPole, because j'ai le vin mauvais and hate drinking, and there'snothing left but wine. I have tried it. But, I say, I've been toldBerg is going up in a great balloon next Sunday from the YusupovGarden and will take up passengers at a fee. Is it true?"

　　"Why, would you go up?"

　　"I... No, oh, no," muttered Svidrigailov really seeming to be deepin thought.

　　"What does he mean? Is he in earnest?" Raskolnikov wondered.

　　"No, the document didn't restrain me," Svidrigailov went on,meditatively. "It was my own doing, not leaving the country, andnearly a year ago Marfa Petrovna gave me back the document on myname day and made me a present of a considerable sum of money, too.She had a fortune, you know. 'You see how I trust you, ArkadyIvanovitch'- that was actually her expression. You don't believe sheused it? But do you know I managed the estate quite decently, theyknow me in the neighbourhood. I ordered books, too. Marfa Petrovnaat first approved, but afterwards she was afraid of my over-studying."

　　"You seem to be missing Marfa Petrovna very much?"

　　"Missing her? Perhaps. Really, perhaps I am. And, by the way, do youbelieve in ghosts?"

　　"What ghosts?"

　　"Why, ordinary ghosts."

　　"Do you believe in them?"

　　"Perhaps not, pour vous plaire.... I wouldn't say no exactly."

　　"Do you see them, then?"

　　Svidrigailov looked at him rather oddly.

　　"Marfa Petrovna is pleased to visit me," he said, twisting his mouthinto a strange smile.

　　"How do you mean 'she is pleased to visit you'?"

　　"She has been three times. I saw her first on the very day of thefuneral, an hour after she was buried. It was the day before I left tocome here. The second time was the day before yesterday, atdaybreak, on the journey at the station of Malaya Vishera, and thethird time was two hours ago in the room where I am staying. I wasalone."

　　"Were you awake?"

　　"Quite awake. I was wide awake every time. She comes, speaks to mefor a minute and goes out at the door- always at the door. I canalmost hear her."

　　"What made me think that something of the sort must be happeningto you?" Raskolnikov said suddenly.

　　At the same moment he was surprised at having said it. He was muchexcited.

　　"What! Did you think so?" Svidrigailov asked in astonishment. "Didyou really? Didn't I say that there was something in common betweenus, eh?"

　　"You never said so!" Raskolnikov cried sharply and with heat.

　　"Didn't I?"

　　"No!"

　　"I thought I did. When I came in and saw you lying with your eyesshut, pretending, I said to myself at once 'here's the man.'"

　　"What do you mean by 'the man?' What are you talking about?" criedRaskolnikov.

　　"What do I mean? I really don't know...." Svidrigailov mutteredingenuously, as though he, too, were puzzled.

　　For a minute they were silent. They stared in each other's faces.

　　"That's all nonsense!" Raskolnikov shouted with vexation. "What doesshe say when she comes to you?"

　　"She! Would you believe it, she talks of the silliest trifles and-man is a strange creature- it makes me angry. The first time shecame in (I was tired you know: the funeral service, the funeralceremony, the lunch afterwards. At last I was left alone in mystudy. I lighted a cigar and began to think), she came in at the door.'You've been so busy to-day, Arkady Ivanovitch, you have forgottento wind the dining room clock,' she said. All those seven years I'vewound that clock every week, and if I forgot it she would alwaysremind me. The next day I set off on my way here. I got out at thestation at daybreak; I'd been asleep, tired out, with my eyes halfopen, I was drinking some coffee. I looked up and there was suddenlyMarfa Petrovna sitting beside me with a pack of cards in her hands.'Shall I tell your fortune for the journey, Arkady Ivanovitch?' Shewas a great hand at telling fortunes. I shall never forgive myself fornot asking her to. I ran away in a fright, and, besides, the bellrang. I was sitting to-day, feeling very heavy after a miserabledinner from a cookshop; I was sitting smoking, all of a sudden MarfaPetrovna again. She came in very smart in a new green silk dresswith a long train. 'Good day, Arkady Ivanovitch! How do you like mydress? Aniska can't make like this.' (Aniska was a dressmaker in thecountry, one of our former serf girls who had been trained inMoscow, a pretty wench.) She stood turning round before me. I lookedat the dress, and then I looked carefully, very carefully, at herface. 'I wonder you trouble to come to me about such trifles, MarfaPetrovna.' 'Good gracious, you won't let one disturb you aboutanything!' To tease her I said, 'I want to get married, MarfaPetrovna.' 'That's just like you, Arkady Ivanovitch; it does youvery little credit to come looking for a bride when you've hardlyburied your wife. And if you could make a good choice, at least, but Iknow it won't be for your happiness or hers, you will only be alaughing-stock to all good people.' Then she went out and her trainseemed to rustle. Isn't it nonsense, eh?"

　　"But perhaps you are telling lies?" Raskolnikov put in.

　　"I rarely lie," answered Svidrigailov thoughtfully, apparently notnoticing the rudeness of the question.

　　"And in the past, have you ever seen ghosts before?"

　　"Y-yes, I have seen them, but only once in my life, six years ago. Ihad a serf, Filka; just after his burial I called out forgetting'Filka, my pipe!' He came in and went to the cupboard where my pipeswere. I sat still and thought 'he is doing it out of revenge,' becausewe had a violent quarrel just before his death. 'How dare you comein with a hole in your elbow,' I said. 'Go away, you scamp!' He turnedand went out, and never came again. I didn't tell Marfa Petrovna atthe time. I wanted to have a service sung for him, but I was ashamed."

　　"You should go to a doctor."

　　"I know I am not well, without your telling me, though I don'tknow what's wrong; I believe I am five times as strong as you are. Ididn't ask you whether you believe that ghosts are seen, but whetheryou believe that they exist."

　　"No, I won't believe it!" Raskolnikov cried, with positive anger.

　　"What do people generally say?" muttered Svidrigailov, as thoughspeaking to himself, looking aside and bowing his head: "They say,'You are ill, so what appears to you is only unreal fantasy.' Butthat's not strictly logical. I agree that ghosts only appear to thesick, but that only proves that they are unable to appear except tothe sick, not that they don't exist."

　　"Nothing of the sort," Raskolnikov insisted irritably.

　　"No? You don't think so?" Svidrigailov went on, looking at himdeliberately. "But what do you say to this argument (help me with it):ghosts are as it were shreds and fragments of other worlds, thebeginning of them. A man in health has, of course, no reason to seethem, because he is above all a man of this earth and is bound for thesake of completeness and order to live only in this life. But assoon as one is ill, as soon as the normal earthly order of theorganism is broken, one begins to realise the possibility of anotherworld; and the more seriously ill one is, the closer becomes one'scontact with that other world, so that as soon as the man dies hesteps straight into that world. I thought of that long ago. If youbelieve in a future life, you could believe in that, too."

　　"I don't believe in a future life," said Raskolnikov.

　　Svidrigailov sat lost in thought.

　　"And what if there are only spiders there, or something of thatsort," he said suddenly.

　　"He is a madman," thought Raskolnikov.

　　"We always imagine eternity as something beyond our conception,something vast, vast! But why must it be vast? Instead of all that,what if it's one little room, like a bathhouse in the country, blackand grimy and spiders in every corner, and that's all eternity is? Isometimes fancy it like that."

　　"Can it be you can imagine nothing juster and more comforting thanthat?" Raskolnikov cried, with a feeling of anguish.

　　"Juster? And how can we tell, perhaps that is just, and do youknow it's what I would certainly have made it," answered Svidrigailov,with a vague smile.

　　This horrible answer sent a cold chill through Raskolnikov.Svidrigailov raised his head, looked at him, and suddenly beganlaughing.

　　"Only think," he cried, "half an hour ago we had never seen eachother, we regarded each other as enemies; there is a matterunsettled between us; we've thrown it aside, and away we've goneinto the abstract! Wasn't I right in saying that we were birds of afeather?"

　　"Kindly allow me," Raskolnikov went on irritably, "to ask you toexplain why you have honoured me with your visit... and... and I am ina hurry, I have no time to waste. I want to go out."

　　"By all means, by all means. Your sister, Avdotya Romanovna, isgoing to be married to Mr. Luzhin, Pyotr Petrovitch?"

　　"Can you refrain from any question about my sister and frommentioning her name? I can't understand how you dare utter her name inmy presence, if you really are Svidrigailov."

　　"Why, but I've come here to speak about her; how can I avoidmentioning her?"

　　"Very good, speak, but make haste."

　　"I am sure that you must have formed your own opinion of this Mr.Luzhin, who is a connection of mine through my wife, if you haveonly seen him for half an hour, or heard any facts about him. He is nomatch for Avdotya Romanovna. I believe Avdotya Romanovna issacrificing herself generously and imprudently for the sake of...for the sake of her family. I fancied from all I had heard of you thatyou would be very glad if the match could be broken off without thesacrifice of worldly advantages. Now I know you personally, I amconvinced of it."

　　"All this is very naive... excuse me, I should have said impudent onyour part," said Raskolnikov.

　　"You mean to say that I am seeking my own ends. Don't be uneasy,Rodion Romanovitch, if I were working for my own advantage, I wouldnot have spoken out so directly. I am not quite a fool. I will confesssomething psychologically curious about that: just now, defending mylove for Avdotya Romanovna, I said I was myself the victim. Well,let me tell you that I've no feeling of love now, not the slightest,so that I wonder myself indeed, for I really did feel something..."

　　"Through idleness and depravity," Raskolnikov put in.

　　"I certainly am idle and depraved, but your sister has suchqualities that even I could not help being impressed by them. Butthat's all nonsense, as I see myself now."

　　"Have you seen that long?"

　　"I began to be aware of it before, but was only perfectly sure of itthe day before yesterday, almost at the moment I arrived inPetersburg. I still fancied in Moscow, though, that I was coming totry to get Avdotya Romanovna's hand and to cut out Mr. Luzhin."

　　"Excuse me for interrupting you; kindly be brief, and come to theobject of your visit. I am in a hurry, I want to go out..."

　　"With the greatest pleasure. On arriving here and determining on acertain... journey, I should like to make some necessary preliminaryarrangements. I left my children with an aunt; they are wellprovided for; and they have no need of me personally. And a nicefather I should make, too! I have taken nothing but what MarfaPetrovna gave me a year ago. That's enough for me. Excuse me, I amjust coming to the point. Before the journey which may come off, Iwant to settle Mr. Luzhin, too. It's not that I detest him so much,but it was through him I quarrelled with Marfa Petrovna when I learnedthat she had dished up this marriage. I want now to see AvdotyaRomanovna through your mediation, and if you like in your presence, toexplain to her that in the first place she will never gain anythingbut harm from Mr. Luzhin. Then begging her pardon for all pastunpleasantness, to make her a present of ten thousand roubles and soassist the rupture with Mr. Luzhin, a rupture to which I believe sheis herself not disinclined, if she could see the way to it."

　　"You are certainly mad," cried Raskolnikov not so much angered asastonished. "How dare you talk like that!"

　　"I knew you would scream at me; but in the first place, though Iam not rich, this ten thousand roubles is perfectly free; I haveabsolutely no need for it. If Avdotya Romanovna does not accept it,I shall waste it in some more foolish way. That's the first thing.Secondly, my conscience is perfectly easy; I make the offer with noulterior motive. You may not believe it, but in the end AvdotyaRomanovna and you will know. The point is, that I did actually causeyour sister, whom I greatly respect, some trouble andunpleasantness, and so, sincerely regretting it, I want- not tocompensate, not to repay her for the unpleasantness, but simply todo something to her advantage, to show that I am not, after all,privileged to do nothing but harm. If there were a millionthfraction of self interest in my offer, I should not have made it soopenly; and I should not have offered her ten thousand only, when fiveweeks ago I offered her more, Besides, I may, perhaps, very soon marrya young lady, and that alone ought to prevent suspicion of anydesign on Avdotya Romanovna. In conclusion, let me say that inmarrying Mr. Luzhin, she is taking money just the same, only fromanother man. Don't be angry, Rodion Romanovitch, think it overcoolly and quietly."

　　Svidrigailov himself was exceedingly cool and quiet as he was sayingthis.

　　"I beg you to say no more," said Raskolnikov. "In any case this isunpardonable impertinence."

　　"Not in the least. Then a man may do nothing but harm to hisneighbour in this world, and is prevented from doing the tiniest bitof good by trivial conventional formalities. That's absurd. If I died,for instance, and left that sum to your sister in my will, surelyshe wouldn't refuse it?"

　　"Very likely she would."

　　"Oh, no, indeed. However, if you refuse it, so be it, though tenthousand roubles is a capital thing to have on occasion. In any case Ibeg you to repeat what I have said to Avdotya Romanovna."

　　"No, I won't."

　　"In that case, Rodion Romanovitch, I shall be obliged to try and seeher myself and worry her by doing so."

　　"And if I do tell her, will you not try to see her?"

　　"I don't know really what to say. I should like very much to see heronce more."

　　"Don't hope for it."

　　"I'm sorry. But you don't know me. Perhaps we may become betterfriends."

　　"You think we may become friends?"

　　"And why not?" Svidrigailov said, smiling. He stood up and tookhis hat. "I didn't quite intend to disturb you and I came here withoutreckoning on it... though I was very much struck by your face thismorning."

　　"Where did you see me this morning?" Raskolnikov asked uneasily.

　　"I saw you by chance.... I kept fancying there is something aboutyou like me.... But don't be uneasy. I am not intrusive; I used to geton all right with card-sharpers, and I never bored Prince Svirbey, agreat personage who is a distant relation of mine, and I could writeabout Raphael's Madonna in Madam Prilukov's album, and I never leftMarfa Petrovna's side for seven years, and I used to stay the night atViazemsky's house in the Hay Market in the old days, and I may go upin a balloon with Berg, perhaps."

　　"Oh, all right. Are you starting soon on your travels, may I ask?"

　　"What travels?"

　　"Why, on that 'journey'; you spoke of it yourself."

　　"A journey? Oh, yes. I did speak of a journey. Well, that's a widesubject.... if only you knew what you are asking," he added, andgave a sudden, loud, short laugh. "Perhaps I'll get married instead ofthe journey. They're making a match for me."

　　"Here?"

　　"Yes."

　　"How have you had time for that?"

　　"But I am very anxious to see Avdotya Romanovna once. I earnestlybeg it. Well, good-bye for the present. Oh, yes, I have forgottensomething. Tell your sister, Rodion Romanovitch, that Marfa Petrovnaremembered her in her will and left her three thousand rubles.That's absolutely certain. Marfa Petrovna arranged it a week beforeher death, and it was done in my presence. Avdotya Romanovna will beable to receive the money in two or three weeks."

　　"Are you telling the truth?"

　　"Yes, tell her. Well, your servant. I am staying very near you."

　　As he went out, Svidrigailov ran up against Razumihin in thedoorway.

　　Chapter Two

　　IT WAS nearly eight o'clock. The two young men hurried toBakaleyev's, to arrive before Luzhin.

　　"Why, who was that?" asked Razumihin, as soon as they were in thestreet.

　　"It was Svidrigailov, that landowner in whose house my sister wasinsulted when she was their governess. Through his persecuting herwith his attentions, she was turned out by his wife, Marfa Petrovna.This Marfa Petrovna begged Dounia's forgiveness afterwards, andshe's just died suddenly. It was of her we were talking thismorning. I don't know why I'm afraid of that man. He came here at onceafter his wife's funeral. He is very strange, and is determined ondoing something.... We must guard Dounia from him... that's what Iwanted to tell you, do you hear?"

　　"Guard her! What can he do to harm Avdotya Romanovna? Thank you,Rodya, for speaking to me like that.... We will, we will guard her.Where does he live?"

　　"I don't know."

　　"Why didn't you ask? What a pity! I'll find out, though."

　　"Did you see him?" asked Raskolnikov after a pause.

　　"Yes, I noticed him, I noticed him well."

　　"You did really see him? You saw him clearly?" Raskolnikov insisted.

　　"Yes, I remember him perfectly, I should know him in a thousand; Ihave a good memory for faces."

　　They were silent again.

　　"Hm!... that's all right," muttered Raskolnikov. "Do you know, Ifancied... I keep thinking that it may have been an hallucination."

　　"What do you mean? I don't understand you."

　　"Well, you all say," Raskolnikov went on, twisting his mouth intoa smile, "that I am mad. I thought just now that perhaps I really ammad, and have only seen a phantom."

　　"What do you mean?"

　　"Why, who can tell? Perhaps I am really mad, and perhapseverything that happened all these days may be only imagination."

　　"Ach, Rodya, you have been upset again!... But what did he say, whatdid he come for?"

　　Raskolnikov did not answer. Razumihin thought a minute.

　　"Now let me tell you my story," he began, "I came to you, you wereasleep. Then we had dinner and then I went to Porfiry's, Zametov wasstill with him. I tried to begin, but it was no use. I couldn'tspeak in the right way. They don't seem to understand and can'tunderstand, but are not a bit ashamed. I drew Porfiry to the window,and began talking to him, but it was still no use. He looked awayand I looked away. At last I shook my fist in his ugly face, andtold him as a cousin I'd brain him. He merely looked at me, I cursedand came away. That was all. It was very stupid. To Zametov I didn'tsay a word. But, you see, I thought I'd made a mess of it, but as Iwent downstairs a brilliant idea struck me: why should we trouble?Of course if you were in any danger or anything, but why need youcare? You needn't care a hang for them. We shall have a laugh atthem afterwards, and if I were in your place I'd mystify them morethan ever. How ashamed they'll be afterwards! Hang them! We can thrashthem afterwards, but let's laugh at them now!"

　　"To be sure," answered Raskolnikov. "But what will you sayto-morrow?" he thought to himself. Strange to say, till that moment ithad never occurred to him to wonder what Razumihin would think when heknew. As he thought it, Raskolnikov looked at him. Razumihin's accountof his visit to Porfiry had very little interest for him, so muchhad come and gone since then.

　　In the corridor they came upon Luzhin; he had arrived punctuallyat eight, and was looking for the number, so that all three went intogether without greeting or looking at one another. The young menwalked in first, while Pyotr Petrovitch, for good manners, lingereda little in the passage, taking off his coat. Pulcheria Alexandrovnacame forward at once to greet him in the doorway, Dounia was welcomingher brother. Pyotr Petrovitch walked in and quite amiably, though withredoubled dignity, bowed to the ladies. He looked, however, asthough he were a little put out and could not yet recover himself.Pulcheria Alexandrovna, who seemed also a little embarrassed, hastenedto make them all sit down at the round table where a samovar wasboiling. Dounia and Luzhin were facing one another on opposite sidesof the table. Razumihin and Raskolnikov were facing PulcheriaAlexandrovna, Razumihin was next to Luzhin and Raskolnikov wasbeside his sister.

　　A moment's silence followed. Pyotr Petrovitch deliberately drewout a cambric handkerchief reeking of scent and blew his nose withan air of a benevolent man who felt himself slighted, and was firmlyresolved to insist on an explanation. In the passage the idea hadoccurred to him to keep on his overcoat and walk away, and so give thetwo ladies a sharp and emphatic lesson and make them feel thegravity of the position. But he could not bring himself to do this.Besides, he could not endure uncertainty and he wanted an explanation:if his request had been so openly disobeyed, there was somethingbehind it, and in that case it was better to find it out beforehand;it rested with him to punish them and there would always be time forthat.

　　"I trust you had a favourable journey," he inquired officially ofPulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　"Oh, very, Pyotr Petrovitch."

　　"I am gratified to hear it. And Avdotya Romanovna is not overfatigued either?"

　　"I am young and strong, I don't get tired, but it was a great strainfor mother," answered Dounia.

　　"That's unavoidable; our national railways are of terrible length.'Mother Russia,' as they say, is a vast country.... In spite of all mydesire to do so, I was unable to meet you yesterday. But I trust allpassed off without inconvenience?"

　　"Oh, no, Pyotr Petrovitch, it was all terribly disheartening,"Pulcheria Alexandrovna hastened to declare with peculiar intonation,"and if Dmitri Prokofitch had not been sent us, I really believe byGod Himself, we should have been utterly lost. Here, he is! DmitriProkofitch Razumihin," she added, introducing him to Luzhin.

　　"I had the pleasure... yesterday," muttered Pyotr Petrovitch witha hostile glance sidelong at Razumihin; then he scowled and wassilent.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch belonged to that class of persons, on the surfacevery polite in society, who make a great point of punctiliousness, butwho, directly they are crossed in anything, are completelydisconcerted, and become more like sacks of flour than elegant andlively men of society. Again all was silent; Raskolnikov wasobstinately mute, Avdotya Romanovna was unwilling to open theconversation too soon. Razumihin had nothing to say, so PulcheriaAlexandrovna was anxious again.

　　"Marfa Petrovna is dead, have you heard?" she began havingrecourse to her leading item of conversation.

　　"To be sure, I heard so. I was immediately informed, and I have cometo make you acquainted with the fact that Arkady IvanovitchSvidrigailov set off in haste for Petersburg immediately after hiswife's funeral. So at least I have excellent authority for believing."

　　"To Petersburg? here?" Dounia asked in alarm and looked at hermother.

　　"Yes, indeed, and doubtless not without some design, having inview the rapidity of his departure, and all the circumstancespreceding it."

　　"Good heavens! won't he leave Dounia in peace even here?" criedPulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　"I imagine that neither you nor Avdotya Romanovna have any groundsfor uneasiness, unless, of course, you are yourselves desirous ofgetting into communication with him. For my part I am on my guard, andam now discovering where he is lodging."

　　"Oh, Pyotr Petrovitch, you would not believe what a fright youhave given me," Pulcheria Alexandrovna went on. "I've only seen himtwice, but I thought him terrible, terrible! I am convinced that hewas the cause of Marfa Petrovna's death."

　　"It's impossible to be certain about that. I have preciseinformation. I do not dispute that he may have contributed toaccelerate the course of events by the moral influence, so to say,of the affront; but as to the general conduct and moralcharacteristics of that personage, I am in agreement with you. I donot know whether he is well off now, and precisely what Marfa Petrovnaleft him; this will be known to me within a very short period; butno doubt here in Petersburg, if he has any pecuniary resources, hewill relapse at once into his old ways. He is the most depraved, andabjectly vicious specimen of that class of men. I have considerablereason to believe that Marfa Petrovna, who was so unfortunate as tofall in love with him and to pay his debts eight years ago, was ofservice to him also in another way. Solely by her exertions andsacrifices, a criminal charge, involving an element of fantastic andhomicidal brutality for which he might well have been sentenced toSiberia, was hushed up. That's the sort of man he is, if you care toknow."

　　"Good heavens!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Raskolnikov listenedattentively.

　　"Are you speaking the truth when you say that you have good evidenceof this?" Dounia asked sternly and emphatically.

　　"I only repeat what I was told in secret by Marfa Petrovna. I mustobserve that from the legal point of view the case was far from clear.There was, and I believe still is, living here a woman calledResslich, a foreigner, who lent small sums of money at interest, anddid other commissions, and with this woman Svidrigailov had for a longwhile close and mysterious relations. She had a relation, a niece Ibelieve, living with her, a deaf and dumb girl of fifteen, orperhaps not more than fourteen. Resslich hated this girl, andgrudged her every crust; she used to beat her mercilessly. One day thegirl was found hanging in the garret. At the inquest the verdict wassuicide. After the usual proceedings the matter ended, but, lateron, information was given that the child had been... cruellyoutraged by Svidrigailov. It is true, this was not clearlyestablished, the information was given by another German woman ofloose character whose word could not be trusted; no statement wasactually made to the police, thanks to Marfa Petrovna's money andexertions; it did not get beyond gossip. And yet the story is a verysignificant one. You heard, no doubt, Avdotya Romanovna, when you werewith them the story of the servant Philip who died of ill treatment hereceived six years ago, before the abolition of serfdom."

　　"I heard on the contrary that this Philip hanged himself."

　　"Quite so, but what drove him, or rather perhaps disposed him, tosuicide, was the systematic persecution and severity of Mr.Svidrigailov."

　　"I don't know that," answered Dounia, dryly. "I only heard a queerstory that Philip was a sort of hypochondriac, a sort of domesticphilosopher, the servants used to say, 'he read himself silly,' andthat he hanged himself partly on account of Mr. Svidrigailov's mockeryof him and not his blows. When I was there he behaved well to theservants, and they were actually fond of him, though they certainlydid blame him for Philip's death."

　　"I perceive, Avdotya Romanovna, that you seem disposed toundertake his defence all of a sudden," Luzhin observed, twistinghis lips into an ambiguous smile, "there's no doubt that he is anastute man, and insinuating where ladies are concerned, of which MarfaPetrovna, who has died so strangely, is a terrible instance. My onlydesire has been to be of service to you and your mother with myadvice, in view of the renewed efforts which may certainly beanticipated from him. For my part it's my firm conviction, that hewill end in a debtor's prison again. Marfa Petrovna had not theslightest intention of settling anything substantial on him, havingregard for his children's interests, and, if she left him anything, itwould only be the merest sufficiency, something insignificant andephemeral, which would not last a year for a man of his habits."

　　"Pyotr Petrovitch, I beg you," said Dounia, "say no more of Mr.Svidrigailov. It makes me miserable."

　　"He has just been to see me," said Raskolnikov, breaking his silencefor the first time.

　　There were exclamations from all, and they all turned to him. EvenPyotr Petrovitch was roused.

　　"An hour and a half ago, he came in when I was asleep, waked me, andintroduced himself," Raskolnikov continued. "He was fairly cheerfuland at ease, and quite hopes that we shall become friends. He isparticularly anxious by the way, Dounia, for an interview with you, atwhich he asked me to assist. He has a proposition to make to you,and he told me about it. He told me, too, that a week before her deathMarfa Petrovna left you three thousand roubles in her will, Dounia,and that you can receive the money very shortly."

　　"Thank God!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna, crossing herself. "Prayfor her soul, Dounia!"

　　"It's a fact!" broke from Luzhin.

　　"Tell us, what more?" Dounia urged Raskolnikov.

　　"Then he said that he wasn't rich and all the estate was left to hischildren who are now with an aunt, then that he was stayingsomewhere not far from me, but where, I don't know, I didn't ask...."

　　"But what, what does he want to propose to Dounia?" criedPulcheria Alexandrovna in a fright. "Did he tell you?"

　　"Yes."

　　"What was it?"

　　"I'll tell you afterwards."

　　Raskolnikov ceased speaking and turned his attention to his tea.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch looked at his watch.

　　"I am compelled to keep a business engagement, and so I shall not bein your way," he added with an air of some pique and he begangetting up.

　　"Don't go, Pyotr Petrovitch," said Dounia, "you intended to spendthe evening. Besides, you wrote yourself that you wanted to have anexplanation with mother."

　　"Precisely so, Avdotya Romanovna," Pyotr Petrovitch answeredimpressively, sitting down again, but still holding his hat. "Icertainly desired an explanation with you and your honoured motherupon a very important point indeed. But as your brother cannot speakopenly in my presence to some proposals of Mr. Svidrigailov, I, too,do not desire and am not able to speak openly... in the presence ofothers... of certain matters of the greatest gravity. Moreover, mymost weighty and urgent request has been disregarded...."

　　Assuming an aggrieved air, Luzhin relapsed into dignified silence.

　　"Your request that my brother should not be present at our meetingwas disregarded solely at my instance," said Dounia. "You wrote thatyou had been insulted by my brother; I think that this must beexplained at once, and you must be reconciled. And if Rodya really hasinsulted you, then he should and will apologise."

　　Pyotr Petrovitch took a stronger line.

　　"There are insults, Avdotya Romanovna, which no good-will can makeus forget. There is a line in everything which it is dangerous tooverstep; and when it has been overstepped, there is no return."

　　"That wasn't what I was speaking of exactly, Pyotr Petrovitch,"Dounia interrupted with some impatience. "Please understand that ourwhole future depends now on whether all this is explained and setright as soon as possible. I tell you frankly at the start that Icannot look at it in any other light, and if you have the least regardfor me, all this business must be ended to-day, however hard thatmay be. I repeat that if my brother is to blame he will ask yourforgiveness."

　　"I am surprised at your putting the question like that," saidLuzhin, getting more and more irritated. "Esteeming, and so to say,adoring you, I may at the same time, very well indeed, be able todislike some member of your family. Though I lay claim to thehappiness of your hand, I cannot accept duties incompatible with..."

　　"Ah, don't be so ready to take offence, Pyotr Petrovitch," Douniainterrupted with feeling, "and be the sensible and generous man I havealways considered, and wish to consider, you to be. I've given you agreat promise, I am your betrothed. Trust me in this matter and,believe me, I shall be capable of judging impartially. My assuming thepart of judge is as much a surprise for my brother as for you. WhenI insisted on his coming to our interview to-day after your letter,I told him nothing of what I meant to do. Understand that, if youare not reconciled, I must choose between you- it must be either youor he. That is how the question rests on your side and on his. I don'twant to be mistaken in my choice, and I must not be. For your sake Imust break off with my brother, for my brother's sake I must break offwith you. I can find out for certain now whether he is a brother tome, and I want to know it; and of you, whether I am dear to you,whether you esteem me, whether you are the husband for me."

　　"Avdotya Romanovna," Luzhin declared huffily, "your words are of toomuch consequence to me; I will say more, they are offensive in view ofthe position I have the honour to occupy in relation to you. To saynothing of your strange and offensive setting me on a level with animpertinent boy, you admit the possibility of breaking your promise tome. You say 'you or he,' showing thereby of how little consequence Iam in your eyes... I cannot let this pass considering the relationshipand... the obligations existing between us."

　　"What!" cried Dounia, flushing. "I set your interest beside all thathas hitherto been most precious in my life, what has made up the wholeof my life, and here you are offended at my making too littleaccount of you."

　　Raskolnikov smiled sarcastically, Razumihin fidgeted, but PyotrPetrovitch did not accept the reproof; on the contrary, at everyword he became more persistent and irritable, as though he relishedit.

　　"Love for the future partner of your life, for your husband, oughtto outweigh your love for your brother," he pronouncedsententiously, "and in any case I cannot be put on the samelevel.... Although I said so emphatically that I would not speakopenly in your brother's presence, nevertheless, I intend now to askyour honoured mother for a necessary explanation on a point of greatimportance closely affecting my dignity. Your son," he turned toPulcheria Alexandrovna, "yesterday in the presence of Mr. Razsudkin(or... I think that's it? excuse me I have forgotten your surname," hebowed politely to Razumihin) "insulted me by misrepresenting theidea I expressed to you in a private conversation, drinking coffee,that is, that marriage with a poor girl who has had experience oftrouble is more advantageous from the conjugal point of view than withone who has lived in luxury, since it is more profitable for the moralcharacter. Your son intentionally exaggerated the significance of mywords and made them ridiculous, accusing me of malicious intentions,and, as far as I could see, relied upon your correspondence withhim. I shall consider myself happy, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, if it ispossible for you to convince me of an opposite conclusion, and therebyconsiderately reassure me. Kindly let me know in what termsprecisely you repeated my words in your letter to Rodion Romanovitch."

　　"I don't remember," faltered Pulcheria Alexandrovna. "I repeatedthem as I understood them. I don't know how Rodya repeated them toyou, perhaps he exaggerated."

　　"He could not have exaggerated them, except at your instigation."

　　"Pyotr Petrovitch," Pulcheria Alexandrovna declared with dignity,"the proof that Dounia and I did not take your words in a very badsense is the fact that we are here."

　　"Good, mother," said Dounia approvingly.

　　"Then this is my fault again," said Luzhin, aggrieved.

　　"Well, Pyotr Petrovitch, you keep blaming Rodion, but you yourselfhave just written what was false about him," Pulcheria Alexandrovnaadded, gaining courage.

　　"I don't remember writing anything false."

　　"You wrote," Raskolnikov said sharply, not turning to Luzhin,"that I gave money yesterday not to the widow of the man who waskilled, as was the fact, but to his daughter (whom I had never seentill yesterday). You wrote this to make dissension between me and myfamily, and for that object added coarse expressions about the conductof a girl whom you don't know. All that is mean slander."

　　"Excuse me, sir," said Luzhin, quivering with fury. "I enlarged uponyour qualities and conduct in my letter solely in response to yoursister's and mother's inquiries how I found you and what impressionyou made on me. As for what you've alluded to in my letter, be so goodas to point out one word of falsehood, show, that is, that youdidn't throw away your money, and that there are not worthless personsin that family, however unfortunate."

　　"To my thinking, you with all your virtues are not worth thelittle finger of that unfortunate girl at whom you throw stones."

　　"Would you go so far then as to let her associate with your motherand sister?"

　　"I have done so already, if you care to know. I made her sit downto-day with mother and Dounia."

　　"Rodya!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Dounia crimsoned, Razumihinknitted his brows. Luzhin smiled with lofty sarcasm.

　　"You may see for yourself, Avdotya Romanovna," he said, "whetherit is possible for us to agree. I hope now that this question is at anend, once and for all. I will withdraw, that I may not hinder thepleasures of family intimacy, and the discussion of secrets." He gotup from his chair and took his hat. "But in withdrawing, I ventureto request that for the future I may be spared similar meetings,and, so to say, compromises. I appeal particularly to you, honouredPulcheria Alexandrovna, on this subject, the more as my letter wasaddressed to you and to no one else."

　　Pulcheria Alexandrovna was a little offended.

　　"You seem to think we are completely under your authority, PyotrPetrovitch. Dounia has told you the reason your desire wasdisregarded, she had the best intentions. And indeed you write asthough you were laying commands upon me. Are we to consider everydesire of yours as a command? Let me tell you on the contrary that youought to show particular delicacy and consideration for us now,because we have thrown up everything, and have come here relying onyou, and so we are in any case in a sense in your hands."

　　"That is not quite true, Pulcheria Alexandrovna, especially at thepresent moment, when the news has come of Marfa Petrovna's legacy,which seems indeed very apropos, judging from the new tone you take tome," he added sarcastically.

　　"Judging from that remark, we may certainly presume that you werereckoning on our helplessness," Dounia observed irritably.

　　"But now in any case I cannot reckon on it, and I particularlydesire not to hinder your discussion of the secret proposals of ArkadyIvanovitch Svidrigailov, which he has entrusted to your brother andwhich have, I perceive, a great and possibly a very agreeable interestfor you."

　　"Good heavens!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　Razumihin could not sit still on his chair.

　　"Aren't you ashamed now, sister?" asked Raskolnikov.

　　"I am ashamed, Rodya," said Dounia. "Pyotr Petrovitch, go away," sheturned to him, white with anger.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch had apparently not at all expected such aconclusion. He had too much confidence in himself, in his power and inthe helplessness of his victims. He could not believe it even now.He turned pale, and his lips quivered.

　　"Avdotyo Romanovna, if I go out of this door now, after such adismissal, then, you may reckon on it, I will never come back.Consider what you are doing. My word is not to be shaken."

　　"What insolence!" cried Dounia, springing up from her seat. "I don'twant you to come back again."

　　"What! So that's how it stands!" cried Luzhin, utterly unable to thelast moment to believe in the rupture and so completely thrown outof his reckoning now. "So that's how it stands! But do you know,Avdotya Romanovna, that I might protest?"

　　"What right have you to speak to her like that?" PulcheriaAlexandrovna intervened hotly. "And what can you protest about? Whatrights have you? Am I to give my Dounia to a man like you? Go away,leave us altogether! We are to blame for having agreed to a wrongaction, and I above all...."

　　"But you have bound me, Pulcheria Alexandrovna," Luzhin stormed in afrenzy, "by your promise, and now you deny it and... besides... I havebeen led on account of that into expenses...."

　　This last complaint was so characteristic of Pyotr Petrovitch,that Raskolnikov, pale with anger and with the effort of restrainingit, could not help breaking into laughter. But PulcheriaAlexandrovna was furious.

　　"Expenses? What expenses? Are you speaking of our trunk? But theconductor brought it for nothing for you. Mercy on us, we have boundyou! What are you thinking about, Pyotr Petrovitch, it was you boundus, hand and foot, not we!"

　　"Enough, mother, no more please," Avdotya Romanovna implored. "PyotrPetrovitch, do be kind and go!"

　　"I am going, but one last word," he said, quite unable to controlhimself. "Your mamma seems to have entirely forgotten that I made upmy mind to take you, so to speak, after the gossip of the town hadspread all over the district in regard to your reputation.Disregarding public opinion for your sake and reinstating yourreputation, I certainly might very well reckon on a fitting return,and might indeed look for gratitude on your part. And my eyes haveonly now been opened! I see myself that I may have acted very, veryrecklessly in disregarding the universal verdict...."

　　"Does the fellow want his head smashed?" cried Razumihin, jumpingup.

　　"You are a mean and spiteful man!" cried Dounia.

　　"Not a word! Not a movement!" cried Raskolnikov, holding Razumihinback; then going close up to Luzhin, "Kindly leave the room!" hesaid quietly and distinctly, "and not a word more or..."

　　Pyotr Petrovitch gazed at him for some seconds with a pale face thatworked with anger, then he turned, went out, and rarely has any mancarried away in his heart such vindictive hatred as he felt againstRaskolnikov. Him, and him alone, he blamed for everything. It isnoteworthy that as he went downstairs he still imagined that hiscase was perhaps not utterly lost, and that, so far as the ladies wereconcerned, all might "very well indeed" be set right again.

　　Chapter Three

　　THE FACT was that up to the last moment he had never expected suchan ending; he had been overbearing to the last degree, neverdreaming that two destitute and defenceless women could escape fromhis control. This conviction was strengthened by his vanity andconceit, a conceit to the point of fatuity. Pyotr Petrovitch, whohad made his way up from insignificance, was morbidly given toself-admiration, had the highest opinion of his intelligence andcapacities, and sometimes even gloated in solitude over his image inthe glass. But what he loved and valued above all was the money he hadamassed by his labour, and by all sorts of devices: that money madehim the equal of all who had been his superiors.

　　When he had bitterly reminded Dounia that he had decided to take herin spite of evil report, Pyotr Petrovitch had spoken with perfectsincerity and had, indeed, felt genuinely indignant at such "blackingratitude." And yet, when he made Dounia his offer, he was fullyaware of the groundlessness of all the gossip. The story had beeneverywhere contradicted by Marfa Petrovna, and was by then disbelievedby all the townspeople, who were warm in Dounia'a defence. And hewould not have denied that he knew all that at the time. Yet hestill thought highly of his own resolution in lifting Dounia to hislevel and regarded it as something heroic. In speaking of it toDounia, he had let out the secret feeling he cherished and admired,and he could not understand that others should fail to admire ittoo. He had called on Raskolnikov with the feelings of a benefactorwho is about to reap the fruits of his good deeds and to hearagreeable flattery. And as he went downstairs now, he consideredhimself most undeservedly injured and unrecognised.

　　Dounia was simply essential to him; to do without her wasunthinkable. For many years he had voluptuous dreams of marriage,but he had gone on waiting and amassing money. He brooded with relish,in profound secret, over the image of a girl- virtuous, poor (she mustbe poor), very young, very pretty, of good birth and education, verytimid, one who had suffered much, and was completely humbled beforehim, one who would all her life look on him as her saviour, worshiphim, admire him and only him. How many scenes, how many amorousepisodes he had imagined on this seductive and playful theme, when hiswork was over! And, behold, the dream of so many years was all butrealised; the beauty and education of Avdotya Romanovna hadimpressed him; her helpless position had been a great allurement; inher he had found even more than he dreamed of. Here was a girl ofpride, character, virtue, of education and breeding superior to hisown (he felt that), and this creature would be slavishly gratefulall her life for his heroic condescension, and would humble herself inthe dust before him, and he would have absolute, unbounded powerover her!... Not long before, he had, too, after long reflection andhesitation, made an important change in his career and was nowentering on a wider circle of business. With this change his cherisheddreams of rising into a higher class of society seemed likely to berealised.... He was, in fact, determined to try his fortune inPetersburg. He knew that women could do a very great deal. Thefascination of a charming, virtuous, highly educated woman mightmake his way easier, might do wonders in attracting people to him,throwing an aureole round him, and now everything was in ruins! Thissudden horrible rupture affected him like a clap of thunder; it waslike a hideous joke, an absurdity. He had only been a tiny bitmasterful, had not even time to speak out, had simply made a joke,been carried away- and it had ended so seriously. And, of course, too,he did love Dounia in his own way; he already possessed her in hisdreams- and all at once! No! The next day, the very next day, itmust all be set right, smoothed over, settled. Above all he must crushthat conceited milksop who was the cause of it all. With a sickfeeling he could not help recalling Razumihin too, but, he soonreassured himself on that score; as though a fellow like that could beput on a level with him! The man he really dreaded in earnest wasSvidrigailov.... He had, in short, a great deal to attend to....-

　　"No, I, I am more to blame than any one!" said Dounia, kissing andembracing her mother. "I was tempted by his money, but on my honour,brother, I had no idea he was such a base man. If I had seen throughhim before, nothing would have tempted me! Don't blame me, brother!"

　　"God has delivered us! God has delivered us!" Pulcheria Alexandrovnamuttered, but half consciously, as though scarcely able to realisewhat had happened.

　　They were all relieved, and in five minutes they were laughing. Onlynow and then Dounia turned white and frowned, remembering what hadpassed. Pulcheria Alexandrovna was surprised to find that she, too,was glad: she had only that morning thought rupture with Luzhin aterrible misfortune. Razumihin was delighted. He did not yet dare toexpress his joy fully, but he was in a fever of excitement as though aton-weight had fallen off his heart. Now he had the right to devotehis life to them, to serve them.... Anything might happen now! Buthe felt afraid to think of further possibilities and dared not let hisimagination range. But Raskolnikov sat still in the same place, almostsullen and indifferent. Though he had been the most insistent ongetting rid of Luzhin, he seemed now the least concerned at what hadhappened. Dounia could not help thinking that he was still angrywith her, and Pulcheria Alexandrovna watched him timidly.

　　"What did Svidrigailov say to you?" said Dounia, approaching him.

　　"Yes, yes!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna.

　　Raskolnikov raised his head.

　　"He wants to make you a present of ten thousand roubles and hedesires to see you once in my presence."

　　"See her! On no account!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. "And howdare he offer her money!"

　　Then Raskolnikov repeated (rather drily) his conversation withSvidrigailov, omitting his account of the ghostly visitations of MarfaPetrovna, wishing to avoid all unnecessary talk.

　　"What answer did you give him?" asked Dounia.

　　"At first I said I would not take any message to you. Then he saidthat he would do his utmost to obtain an interview with you without myhelp. He assured me that his passion for you was a passinginfatuation, now he has no feeling for you. He doesn't want you tomarry Luzhin.... His talk was altogether rather muddled."

　　"How do you explain him to yourself, Rodya? How did he strike you?"

　　"I must confess I don't quite understand him. He offers you tenthousand, and yet says he is not well off. He says he is going away,and in ten minutes he forgets he has said it. Then he says is he goingto be married and has already fixed on the girl.... No doubt he hasa motive, and probably a bad one. But it's odd that he should be soclumsy about it if he had any designs against you.... Of course, Irefused this money on your account, once for all. Altogether, Ithought him very strange.... One might almost think he was mad. ButI may be mistaken; that may only be the part he assumes. The deathof Marfa Petrovna seems to have made a great impression on him."

　　"God rest her soul," exclaimed Pulcheria Alexandrovna. "I shallalways, always pray for her! Where should we be now, Dounia, withoutthis three thousand! It's as though it had fallen from heaven! Why,Rodya, this morning we had only three roubles in our pocket and Douniaand I were just planning to pawn her watch, so as to avoid borrowingfrom that man until he offered help."

　　Dounia seemed strangely impressed by Svidrigailov's offer. She stillstood meditating.

　　"He has got some terrible plan," she said in a half whisper toherself, almost shuddering.

　　Raskolnikov noticed this disproportionate terror.

　　"I fancy I shall have to see him more than once again," he said toDounia.

　　"We will watch him! I will track him out!" cried Razumihin,vigorously. "I won't lose sight of him. Rodya has given me leave. Hesaid to me himself just now. 'Take care of my sister.' Will you giveme leave, too, Avdotya Romanovna?"

　　Dounia smiled and held out her hand, but the look of anxiety did notleave her face. Pulcheria Alexandrovna gazed at her timidly, but thethree thousand roubles had obviously a soothing effect on her.

　　A quarter of an hour later, they were all engaged in a livelyconversation. Even Raskolnikov listened attentively for some time,though he did not talk. Razumihin was the speaker.

　　"And why, why should you go away?" he flowed on ecstatically. "Andwhat are you to do in a little town? The great thing is, you are allhere together and you need one another- you do need one another,believe me. For a time, anyway.... Take me into partnership and Iassure you we'll plan a capital enterprise. Listen! I'll explain itall in detail to you, the whole project! It all flashed into my headthis morning, before anything had happened... I tell you what; Ihave an uncle, I must introduce him to you (a most accommodating andrespectable old man). This uncle has got a capital of a thousandroubles, and he lives on his pension and has no need of that money.For the last two years he has been bothering me to borrow it fromhim and pay him six per cent. interest. I know what that means; hesimply wants to help me. Last year I had no need of it, but thisyear I resolved to borrow it as soon as he arrived. Then you lend meanother thousand of your three and we have enough for a start, sowe'll go into partnership, and what are we going to do?"

　　Then Razumihin began to unfold his project, and he explained atlength that almost all our publishers and booksellers know nothingat all of what they are selling, and for that reason they areusually bad publishers, and that any decent publications pay as a ruleand give a profit, sometimes a considerable one. Razumihin had,indeed, been dreaming of setting up as a publisher. For the last twoyears he had been working in publishers' offices, and knew threeEuropean languages well, though he had told Raskolnikov six daysbefore that he was "schwach" in German with an object of persuadinghim to take half his translation and half the payment for it. He hadtold a lie, then, and Raskolnikov knew he was lying.

　　"Why, why should we let our chance slip when we have one of thechief means of success- money of our own!" cried Razumihin warmly. "Ofcourse there will be a lot of work, but we will work, you, AvdotyaRomanovna, I, Rodion.... You get a splendid profit on some booksnowadays! And the great point of the business is that we shall knowjust what wants translating, and we shall be translating,publishing, learning all at once. I can be of use because I haveexperience. For nearly two years I've been scuttling about among thepublishers, and now I know every detail of their business. You neednot be a saint to make pots, believe me! And why, why should we letour chance slip! Why, I know- and I kept the secret- two or threebooks which one might get a hundred roubles simply for thinking oftranslating and publishing. Indeed, and I would not take fivehundred for the very idea of one of them. And what do you think? IfI were to tell a publisher, I dare say he'd hesitate- they are suchblockheads! And as for the business side, printing, paper, selling,you trust to me, I know my way about. We'll begin in a small way andgo on to a large. In any case it will get us our living and we shallget back our capital."

　　Dounia's eyes shone.

　　"I like what you are saying, Dmitri Prokofitch!" she said.

　　"I know nothing about it, of course," put in Pulcheria Alexandrovna,"it may be a good idea, but again God knows. It's new and untried.Of course, we must remain here at least for a time." She looked atRodya.

　　"What do you think, brother?" said Dounia.

　　"I think he's got a very good idea," he answered. "Of course, it'stoo soon to dream of a publishing firm, but we certainly might bringout five or six books and be sure of success. I know of one bookmyself which would be sure to go well. And as for his being able tomanage it, there's no doubt about that either. He knows thebusiness.... But we can talk it over later...."

　　"Hurrah!" cried Razumihin. "Now, stay, there's a flat here in thishouse, belonging to the same owner. It's a special flat apart, notcommunicating with these lodgings. It's furnished, rent moderate,three rooms. Suppose you take them to begin with. I'll pawn your watchto-morrow and bring you the money, and everything can be arrangedthen. You can all three live together, and Rodya will be with you. Butwhere are you off to, Rodya?"

　　"What, Rodya, you are going already?" Pulcheria Alexandrovna askedin dismay.

　　"At such a minute?" cried Razumihin.

　　Dounia looked at her brother with incredulous wonder. He held hiscap in his hand, he was preparing to leave them.

　　"One would think you were burying me or saying good-bye for ever,"he said somewhat oddly. He attempted to smile, but it did not turn outa smile. "But who knows, perhaps it is the last time we shall see eachother..." he let slip accidentally. It was what he was thinking, andit somehow was uttered aloud.

　　"What is the matter with you?" cried his mother.

　　"Where are you going, Rodya?" asked Dounia rather strangely.

　　"Oh, I'm quite obliged to..." he answered vaguely, as thoughhesitating what he would say. But there was a look of sharpdetermination in his white face.

　　"I meant to say... as I was coming here... I meant to tell you,mother, and you, Dounia, that it would be better for us to part fora time. I feel ill, I am not at peace.... I will come afterwards, Iwill come of myself... when it's possible, I remember you and loveyou.... Leave me, leave me alone. I decided this even before... I'mabsolutely resolved on it. Whatever may come to me, whether I cometo ruin or not, I want to be alone. Forget me altogether, it's better.Don't inquire about me. When I can, I'll come of myself or... I'llsend for you. Perhaps it will all come back, but now if you love me,give me up... else I shall begin to hate you, I feel it.... Good-bye!"

　　"Good God!" cried Pulcheria Alexandrovna. Both his mother and hissister were terribly alarmed. Razumihin was also.

　　"Rodya, Rodya, be reconciled with us! Let us be as before!" criedhis poor mother.

　　He turned slowly to the door and slowly went out of the room. Douniaovertook him.

　　"Brother, what are you doing to mother?" she whispered, her eyesflashing with indignation.

　　He looked dully at her.

　　"No matter, I shall come.... I'm coming," he muttered in anundertone, as though not fully conscious of what he was saying, and hewent out of the room.

　　"Wicked, heartless egoist!" cried Dounia.

　　"He is insane, but not heartless. He is mad! Don't you see it?You're heartless after that!" Razumihin whispered in her ear,squeezing her hand tightly. "I shall be back directly," he shoutedto the horror-stricken mother, and he ran out of the room.

　　Raskolnikov was waiting for him at the end of the passage.

　　"I knew you would run after me," he said. "Go back to them- bewith them... be with them to-morrow and always.... I... perhaps Ishall come... if I can. Good-bye."

　　And without holding out his hand he walked away.

　　"But where are you going? What are you doing? What's the matter withyou? How can you go on like this?" Razumihin muttered, at his wits'end.

　　Raskolnikov stopped once more.

　　"Once for all, never ask me about anything. I have nothing to tellyou. Don't come to see me. Maybe I'll come here.... Leave me, butdon't leave them. Do you understand me?"

　　It was dark in the corridor, they were standing near the lamp. For aminute they were looking at one another in silence. Razumihinremembered that minute all his life. Raskolnikov's burning andintent eyes grew more penetrating every moment, piercing into hissoul, into his consciousness. Suddenly Razumihin started. Somethingstrange, as it were, passed between them.... Some idea, some hint asit were, slipped, something awful, hideous, and suddenly understood onboth sides.... Razumihin turned pale.

　　"Do you understand now?" said Raskolnikov, his face twitchingnervously. "Go back, go to them," he said suddenly, and turningquickly, he went out of the house.

　　I will not attempt to describe how Razumihin went back to theladies, how he soothed them, how he protested that Rodya needed restin his illness, protested that Rodya was sure to come, that he wouldcome every day, that he was very, very much upset, that he must not beirritated, that he, Razumihin, would watch over him, would get him adoctor, the best doctor, a consultation.... In fact from thatevening Razumihin took his place with them as a son and a brother.

　　Chapter Four

　　RASKOLNIKOV WENT straight to the house on the canal bank where Sonialived. It was an old green house of three storeys. He found the porterand obtained from him vague directions as to the whereabouts ofKapernaumov, the tailor. Having found in the corner of the courtyardthe entrance to the dark and narrow staircase, he mounted to thesecond floor and came out into a gallery that ran round the wholesecond storey over the yard. While he was wandering in the darkness,uncertain where to turn for Kapernaumov's door, a door opened threepaces from him; he mechanically took hold of it.

　　"Who is there?" a woman's voice asked uneasily.

　　"It's I... come to see you," answered Raskolnikov and he walked intothe tiny entry.

　　On a broken chair stood a candle in a battered copper candlestick.

　　"It's you! Good heavens!" cried Sonia weakly and she stood rooted tothe spot.

　　"Which is your room? This way?" and Raskolnikov, trying not tolook at her, hastened in.

　　A minute later Sonia, too, came in with the candle, set down thecandlestick and, completely disconcerted, stood before himinexpressibly agitated and apparently frightened by his unexpectedvisit. The colour rushed suddenly to her pale face and tears came intoher eyes... She felt sick and ashamed and happy, too.... Raskolnikovturned away quickly and sat on a chair by the table. He scanned theroom in a rapid glance.

　　It was a large but exceeding low-pitched room, the only one let bythe Kapernaumovs, to whose rooms a closed door led in the wall onthe left. In the opposite side on the right hand wall was anotherdoor, always kept locked. That led to the next flat, which formed aseparate lodging. Sonia's room looked like a barn; it was a veryirregular quadrangle and this gave it a grotesque appearance. A wallwith three windows looking out on to the canal ran aslant so thatone corner formed a very acute angle, and it was difficult to see init without very strong light. The other corner wasdisproportionately obtuse. There was scarcely any furniture in the bigroom: in the corner on the right was a bedstead, beside it, nearestthe door, a chair. A plain, deal table covered by a blue cloth stoodagainst the same wall, close to the door into the other flat. Tworush-bottom chairs stood by the table. On the opposite wall near theacute angle stood a small plain wooden chest of drawers looking, as itwere, lost in a desert. That was all there was in the room. Theyellow, scratched and shabby wall-paper was black in the corners. Itmust have been damp and full of fumes in the winter. There was everysign of poverty; even the bedstead had no curtain.

　　Sonia looked in silence at her visitor, who was so attentively andunceremoniously scrutinising her room, and even began at last totremble with terror, as though she was standing before her judge andthe arbiter of her destinies.

　　"I am late.... eleven, isn't it?" he asked, still not lifting hiseyes.

　　"Yes," muttered Sonia, "oh, yes, it is," she added, hastily, asthough in that lay her means of escape. "My landlady's clock hasjust struck... I heard it myself...."

　　"I've come to you for the last time," Raskolnikov went ongloomily, although this was the first time. "I may perhaps not see youagain..."

　　"Are you... going away?"

　　"I don't know... to-morrow...."

　　"Then you are not coming to Katerina Ivanovna to-morrow?" Sonia'svoice shook.

　　"I don't know. I shall know to-morrow morning.... Never mind that:I've come to say one word...."

　　He raised his brooding eyes to her and suddenly noticed that hewas sitting down while she was all the while standing before him.

　　"Why are you standing? Sit down," he said in a changed voice, gentleand friendly.

　　She sat down. He looked kindly and almost compassionately at her.

　　"How thin you are! What a hand! Quite transparent, like a deadhand."

　　He took her hand. Sonia smiled faintly.

　　"I have always been like that," she said.

　　"Even when you lived at home?"

　　"Yes."

　　"Of course, you were," he added abruptly and the expression of hisface and the sound of his voice changed again suddenly.

　　He looked round him once more.

　　"You rent this room from the Kapernaumovs?"

　　"Yes...."

　　"They live there, through that door?"

　　"Yes.... They have another room like this."

　　"All in one room?"

　　"Yes."

　　"I should be afraid in your room at night," he observed gloomily.

　　"They are very good people, very kind," answered Sonia, who stillseemed bewildered, "and all the furniture, everything... everything istheirs. And they are very kind and the children, too, often come tosee me."

　　"They all stammer, don't they?"

　　"Yes.... He stammers and he's lame. And his wife, too.... It's notexactly that she stammers, but she can't speak plainly. She is avery kind woman. And he used to be a house serf. And there are sevenchildren... and it's only the eldest one that stammers and theothers are simply ill... but they don't stammer.... But where didyou hear about them?" she added with some surprise.

　　"Your father told me, then. He told me all about you.... And how youwent out at six o'clock and came back at nine and how KaterinaIvanovna knelt down by your bed."

　　Sonia was confused.

　　"I fancied I saw him to-day," she whispered hesitatingly.

　　"Whom?"

　　"Father. I was walking in the street, out there at the corner, aboutten o'clock and he seemed to be walking in front. It looked justlike him. I wanted to go to Katerina Ivanovna...."

　　"You were walking in the streets?"

　　"Yes," Sonia whispered abruptly, again overcome with confusion andlooking down.

　　"Katerina Ivanovna used to beat you, I daresay?"

　　"Oh no, what are you saying? No!" Sonia looked at him almost withdismay.

　　"You love her, then?"

　　"Love her? Of course!" said Sonia with plaintive emphasis, and sheclasped her hands in distress. "Ah, you don't.... If you only knew!You see, she is quite like a child.... Her mind is quite unhinged, yousee... from sorrow. And how clever she used to be... how generous...how kind! Ah, you don't understand, you don't understand!"

　　Sonia said this as though in despair, wringing her hands inexcitement and distress. Her pale cheeks flushed, there was a lookof anguish in her eyes. It was clear that she was stirred to thevery depths, that she was longing to speak, to champion, to expresssomething. A sort of insatiable compassion, if one may so expressit, was reflected in every feature of her face.

　　"Beat me! how can you? Good heavens, beat me! And if she did beatme, what then? What of it? You know nothing, nothing about it....She is so unhappy... ah, how unhappy! And ill.... She is seekingrighteousness, she is pure. She has such faith that there must berighteousness everywhere and she expects it.... And if you were totorture her, she wouldn't do wrong. She doesn't see that it'simpossible for people to be righteous and she is angry at it. Like achild, like a child. She is good!"

　　"And what will happen to you?"

　　Sonia looked at him inquiringly.

　　"They are left on your hands, you see. They were all on your handsbefore, though.... And your father came to you to beg for drink. Well,how will it be now?"

　　"I don't know," Sonia articulated mournfully.

　　"Will they stay there?"

　　"I don't know.... They are in debt for the lodging, but thelandlady, I hear, said to-day that she wanted to get rid of them,and Katerina Ivanovna says that she won't stay another minute."

　　"How is it she is so bold? She relies upon you?"

　　"Oh, no, don't talk like that.... We are one, we live like one."Sonia was agitated again and even angry, as though a canary or someother little bird were to be angry. "And what could she do? What, whatcould she do?" she persisted, getting hot and excited. "And how shecried to-day! Her mind is unhinged, haven't you noticed it? At oneminute she is worrying like a child that everything should be rightto-morrow, the lunch and all that.... Then she is wringing herhands, spitting blood, weeping, and all at once she will beginknocking her head against the wall, in despair. Then she will becomforted again. She builds all her hopes on you; she says that youwill help her now and that she will borrow a little money somewhereand go to her native town with me and set up a boarding school for thedaughters of gentlemen and take me to superintend it, and we willbegin a new splendid life. And she kisses and hugs me, comforts me,and you know she has such faith, such faith in her fancies! Onecan't contradict her. And all the day long she has been washing,cleaning, mending. She dragged the wash tub into the room with herfeeble hands and sank on the bed, gasping for breath. We went thismorning to the shops to buy shoes for Polenka and Lida for theirsare quite worn out. Only the money we'd reckoned wasn't enough, notnearly enough. And she picked out such dear little boots, for shehas taste, you don't know. And there in the shop she burst outcrying before the shopmen because she hadn't enough.... Ah, it was sadto see her...."

　　"Well, after that I can understand your living like this,"Raskolnikov said with a bitter smile.

　　"And aren't you sorry for them? Aren't you sorry?" Sonia flew at himagain. "Why, I know, you gave your last penny yourself, though you'dseen nothing of it, and if you'd seen everything, oh dear! And howoften, how often I've brought her to tears! Only last week! Yes, I!Only a week before his death. I was cruel! And how often I've done it!Ah, I've been wretched at the thought of it all day!"

　　Sonia wrung her hands as she spoke at the pain of remembering it.

　　"You were cruel?"

　　"Yes, I- I. I went to see them," she went on, weeping, "and fathersaid, 'read me something, Sonia, my head aches, read to me, here's abook.' He had a book he had got from Andrey SemyonovitchLebeziatnikov, he lives there, he always used to get hold of suchfunny books. And I said, 'I can't stay,' as I didn't want to read, andI'd gone in chiefly to show Katerina Ivanovna some collars.Lizaveta, the pedlar, sold me some collars and cuffs cheap, pretty,new, embroidered ones. Katerina Ivanovna liked them very much; she putthem on and looked at herself in the glass and was delighted withthem. 'Make me a present of them, Sonia,' she said, 'please do.''Please do,' she said, she wanted them so much. And when could shewear them? They just reminded her of her old happy days. She looked atherself in the glass, admired herself, and she has no clothes atall, no things of her own, hasn't had all these years! And she neverasks any one for anything; she is proud, she'd sooner give awayeverything. And these she asked for, she liked them so much. And I wassorry to give them. 'What use are they to you, Katerina Ivanovna?' Isaid. I spoke like that to her, I ought not to have said that! Shegave me such a look. And she was so grieved, so grieved at my refusingher. And it was so sad to see.... And she was not grieved for thecollars, but for my refusing, I saw that. Ah, if only I could bring itall back, change it, take back those words! Ah, if I... but it'snothing to you!"

　　"Did you know Lizaveta, the pedlar?"

　　"Yes.... Did you know her?" Sonia asked with some surprise.

　　"Katerina Ivanovna is in consumption, rapid consumption; she willsoon die," said Raskolnikov after a pause, without answering herquestion.

　　"Oh, no, no, no!"

　　And Sonia unconsciously clutched both his hands, as though imploringthat she should not.

　　"But it will be better if she does die."

　　"No, not better, not at all better!" Sonia unconsciously repeated indismay.

　　"And the children? What can you do except take them to live withyou?"

　　"Oh, I don't know," cried Sonia, almost in despair, and she puther hands to her head.

　　It was evident that that idea had very often occurred to herbefore and he had only roused it again.

　　"And, what, if even now, while Katerina Ivanovna is alive, you getill and are taken to the hospital, what will happen then?" hepersisted pitilessly.

　　"How can you? That cannot be!"

　　And Sonia's face worked with awful terror.

　　"Cannot be?" Raskolnikov went on with a harsh smile. "You are notinsured against it, are you? What will happen to them then? Theywill be in the street, all of them, she will cough and beg and knockher head against some wall, as she did to-day, and the children willcry.... Then she will fall down, be taken to the police station and tothe hospital, she will die, and the children..."

　　"Oh, no.... God will not let it be!" broke at last from Sonia'soverburdened bosom.

　　She listened, looking imploringly at him, clasping her hands in dumbentreaty, as though it all depended upon him.

　　Raskolnikov got up and began to walk about the room. A minutepassed. Sonia was standing with her hands and her head hanging interrible dejection.

　　"And can't you save? Put by for a rainy day?" he asked, stoppingsuddenly before her.

　　"No," whispered Sonia.

　　"Of course not. Have you tried?" he added almost ironically.

　　"Yes."

　　"And it didn't come off! Of course not! No need to ask."

　　And again he paced the room. Another minute passed.

　　"You don't get money every day?"

　　Sonia was more confused than ever and colour rushed into her faceagain.

　　"No," she whispered with a painful effort.

　　"It will be the same with Polenka, no doubt," he said suddenly.

　　"No, no! It can't be, no!" Sonia cried aloud in desperation, asthough she had been stabbed. "God would not allow anything so awful!"

　　"He lets others come to it."

　　"No, no! God will protect her, God!" she repeated beside herself.

　　"But, perhaps, there is no God at all," Raskolnikov answered witha sort of malignance, laughed and looked at her.

　　Sonia's face suddenly changed; a tremor passed over it. She lookedat him with unutterable reproach, tried to say something, but couldnot speak and broke into bitter, bitter sobs, hiding her face in herhands.

　　"You say Katerina Ivanovna's mind is unhinged; your own mind isunhinged," he said after a brief silence.

　　Five minutes passed. He still paced up and down the room in silence,not looking at her. At last he went up to her; his eyes glittered.He put his two hands on her shoulders and looked straight into hertearful face. His eyes were hard, feverish and piercing, his lips weretwitching. All at once he bent down quickly and dropping to theground, kissed her foot. Sonia drew back from him as from a madman.And certainly he looked like a madman.

　　"What are you doing to me?" she muttered, turning pale, and a suddenanguish clutched at her heart.

　　He stood up at once.

　　"I did not bow down to you, I bowed down to all the suffering ofhumanity," he said wildly and walked away to the window. "Listen,"he added, turning to her a minute later. "I said just now to aninsolent man that he was not worth your little finger... and that Idid my sister honour making her sit beside you."

　　"Ach, you said that to them! And in her presence?" cried Sonia,frightened. "Sit down with me! An honour! Why, I'm...dishonourable.... Ah, why did you say that?"

　　"It was not because of your dishonour and your sin I said that ofyou, but because of your great suffering. But you are a greatsinner, that's true," he added almost solemnly, "and your worst sin isthat you have destroyed and betrayed yourself for nothing. Isn'tthat fearful? Isn't it fearful that you are living in this filth whichyou loathe so, and at the same time you know yourself (you've onlyto open your eyes) that you are not helping any one by it, notsaving any one from anything! Tell me," he went on almost in a frenzy,"how this shame and degradation can exist in you side by side withother, opposite, holy feelings? It would be better, a thousand timesbetter and wiser to leap into the water and end it all!"

　　"But what would become of them?" Sonia asked faintly, gazing athim with eyes of anguish, but not seeming surprised at his suggestion.

　　Raskolnikov looked strangely at her. He read it all in her face;so she must have had that thought already, perhaps many times, andearnestly she had thought out in her despair how to end it and soearnestly, that now she scarcely wondered at his suggestion. She hadnot even noticed the cruelty of his words. (The significance of hisreproaches and his peculiar attitude to her shame she had, ofcourse, not noticed either, and that, too, was clear to him.) But hesaw how monstrously the thought of her disgraceful, shamefulposition was torturing her and had long tortured her. "What, what," hethought, "could hitherto have hindered her from putting an end to it?"Only then he realised what those poor little orphan children andthat pitiful half-crazy Katerina Ivanovna, knocking her head againstthe wall in her consumption, meant for Sonia.

　　But, nevertheless, it was clear to him again that with her characterand the amount of education she had after all received, she couldnot in any case remain so. He was still confronted by the question howcould she have remained so long in that position without going outof her mind, since she could not bring herself to jump into the water?Of course he knew that Sonia's position was an exceptional case,though unhappily not unique and not infrequent, indeed; but thatvery exceptionalness, her tinge of education, her previous life might,one would have thought, have killed her at the first step on thatrevolting path. What held her up- surely not depravity? All thatinfamy had obviously only touched her mechanically, not one drop ofreal depravity had penetrated to her heart; he saw that. He sawthrough her as she stood before him....

　　"There are three ways before her," he thought, "the canal, themadhouse, or... at last to sink into depravity which obscures the mindand turns the heart to stone."

　　The last idea was the most revolting, but he was a sceptic, he wasyoung, abstract, and therefore cruel, and so he could not helpbelieving that the last end was the most likely.

　　"But can that be true?" he cried to himself. "Can that creaturewho has still preserved the purity of her spirit be consciouslydrawn at last into that sink of filth and iniquity? Can the processalready have begun? Can it be that she has only been able to bear ittill now, because vice has begun to be less loathsome to her? No,no, that cannot be!" he cried, as Sonia had just before. "No, what haskept her from the canal till now is the idea of sin and they, thechildren.... And if she has not gone out of her mind... but who saysshe has not gone out of her mind? Is she in her senses? Can onetalk, can one reason as she does? How can she sit on the edge of theabyss of loathsomeness into which she is slipping and refuse to listenwhen she is told of danger? Does she expect a miracle? No doubt shedoes. Doesn't that all mean madness?"

　　He stayed obstinately at that thought. He liked that explanationindeed better than any other. He began looking more intently at her.

　　"So you pray to God a great deal, Sonia?" he asked her.

　　Sonia did not speak; he stood beside her waiting for an answer.

　　"What should I be without God?" she whispered rapidly, forcibly,glancing at him with suddenly flashing eyes, and squeezing his hand.

　　"Ah, so that is it!" he thought.

　　"And what does God do for you?" he asked, probing her further.

　　Sonia was silent a long while, as though she could not answer. Herweak chest kept heaving with emotion.

　　"Be silent! Don't ask! You don't deserve!" she cried suddenly,looking sternly and wrathfully at him.

　　"That's it, that's it," he repeated to himself.

　　"He does everything," she whispered quickly, looking down again.

　　"That's the way out! That's the explanation," he decided,scrutinising her with eager curiosity, with a new, strange, almostmorbid feeling. He gazed at that pale, thin, irregular, angular littleface, those soft blue eyes, which could flash with such fire, suchstern energy, that little body still shaking with indignation andanger- and it all seemed to him more and more strange, almostimpossible. "She is a religious maniac!" he repeated to himself.

　　There was a book lying on the chest of drawers. He had noticed itevery time he paced up and down the room. Now he took it up and lookedat it. It was the New Testament in the Russian translation. It wasbound in leather, old and worn.

　　"Where did you get that?" he called to her across the room.

　　She was still standing in the same place, three steps from thetable.

　　"It was brought me," she answered, as it were unwillingly, notlooking at him.

　　"Who brought it?"

　　"Lizaveta, I asked her for it."

　　"Lizaveta! strange!" he thought.

　　Everything about Sonia seemed to him stranger and more wonderfulevery moment. He carried the book to the candle and began to turn overthe pages.

　　"Where is the story of Lazarus?" he asked suddenly.

　　Sonia looked obstinately at the ground and would not answer. She wasstanding sideways to the table.

　　"Where is the raising of Lazarus? Find it for me, Sonia."

　　She stole a glance at him.

　　"You are not looking in the right place.... It's in the fourthgospel," she whispered sternly, without looking at him.

　　"Find it and read it to me," he said. He sat down with his elbowon the table, leaned his head on his hand and looked away sullenly,prepared to listen.

　　"In three weeks' time they'll welcome me in the madhouse! I shall bethere if I am not in a worse place," he muttered to himself.

　　Sonia heard Raskolnikov's request distrustfully and movedhesitatingly to the table. She took the book however.

　　"Haven't you read it?" she asked, looking up at him across thetable.

　　Her voice became sterner and sterner.

　　"Long ago.... When I was at school. Read!"

　　"And haven't you heard it in church?"

　　"I... haven't been. Do you often go?"

　　"N-no," whispered Sonia.

　　Raskolnikov smiled.

　　"I understand.... And you won't go to your father's funeralto-morrow?"

　　"Yes, I shall. I was at church last week, too... I had a requiemservice."

　　"For whom?"

　　"For Lizaveta. She was killed with an axe."

　　His nerves were more and more strained. His head began to go round.

　　"Were you friends with Lizaveta?"

　　"Yes.... She was good... she used to come... not often... shecouldn't.... We used to read together and... talk. She will see God."

　　The last phrase sounded strange in his ears. And here wassomething new again: the mysterious meetings with Lizaveta and both ofthem- religious maniacs.

　　"I shall be a religious maniac myself soon! It's infectious!"

　　"Read!" he cried irritably and insistently.

　　Sonia still hesitated. Her heart was throbbing. She hardly daredto read to him. He looked almost with exasperation at the "unhappylunatic."

　　"What for? You don't believe?..." she whispered softly and as itwere breathlessly.

　　"Read! I want you to," he persisted. "You used to read to Lizaveta."

　　Sonia opened the book and found the place. Her hands were shaking,her voice failed her. Twice she tried to begin and could not bring outthe first syllable.

　　"Now a certain man was sick named Lazarus of Bethany..." sheforced herself at last to read, but at the third word her voicebroke like an overstrained string. There was a catch in her breath.

　　Raskolnikov saw in part why Sonia could not bring herself to read tohim and the more he saw this, the more roughly and irritably heinsisted on her doing so. He understood only too well how painful itwas for her to betray and unveil all that was her own. He understoodthat these feelings really were her secret treasure, which she hadkept perhaps for years, perhaps from childhood, while she lived withan unhappy father and a distracted stepmother crazed by grief, inthe midst of starving children and unseemly abuse and reproaches.But at the same time he knew now and knew for certain that, althoughit filled her with dread and suffering, yet she had a tormentingdesire to read and to read to him that he might hear it, and to readnow whatever might come of it!... He read this in her eyes, he couldsee it in her intense emotion. She mastered herself, controlled thespasm in her throat and went on reading the eleventh chapter of St.John. She went on to the nineteenth verse:

　　"And many of the Jews came to Martha and Mary to comfort themconcerning their brother.

　　Then Martha as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming went andmet Him: but Mary sat still in the house.

　　Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if Thou hadst been here, mybrother had not died.

　　But I know that even now whatsoever Thou wilt ask of God, God willgive it Thee...."

　　Then she stopped again with a shamefaced feeling that her voicewould quiver and break again.

　　"Jesus said unto her, thy brother shall rise again.

　　Martha saith unto Him, I know that he shall rise again in theresurrection, at the last day.

　　Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life: he thatbelieveth in Me though he were dead, yet shall he live.

　　And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die.Believest thou this?

　　She saith unto Him,"

　　(And drawing a painful breath, Sonia read distinctly and forcibly asthough she were making a public confession of faith.)

　　"Yea, Lord: I believe that Thou art the Christ, the Son of God Whichshould come into the world."

　　She stopped and looked up quickly at him, but controlling herselfwent on reading. Raskolnikov sat without moving, his elbows on thetable and his eyes turned away. She read to the thirty-second verse.

　　"Then when Mary was come where Jesus was and saw Him, she felldown at His feet, saying unto Him, Lord if Thou hadst been here, mybrother had not died.

　　When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weepingwhich came with her, He groaned in the spirit and was troubled,

　　And said, Where have ye laid him? They said unto Him, Lord, come andsee.

　　Jesus wept.

　　Then said the Jews, behold how He loved him!

　　And some of them said, could not this Man which opened the eyes ofthe blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?"

　　Raskolnikov turned and looked at her with emotion. Yes, he had knownit! She was trembling in a real physical fever. He had expected it.She was getting near the story of the greatest miracle and a feelingof immense triumph came over her. Her voice rang out like a bell;triumph and joy gave it power. The lines danced before her eyes, butshe knew what she was reading by heart. At the last verse "Could notthis Man which opened the eyes of the blind..." dropping her voice shepassionately reproduced the doubt, the reproach and censure of theblind disbelieving Jews, who in another moment would fall at Hisfeet as though struck by thunder, sobbing and believing.... "And he,he- too, is blinded and unbelieving, he, too, will hear, he, too, willbelieve, yes, yes! At once, now," was what she was dreaming, and shewas quivering with happy anticipation.

　　"Jesus therefore again groaning in Himself cometh to the grave. Itwas a cave, and a stone lay upon it.

　　Jesus said, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of him thatwas dead, saith unto Him, Lord by this time he stinketh: for he hathbeen dead four days."

　　She laid emphasis on the word four.

　　"Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee that if thou wouldestbelieve, thou shouldest see the glory of God?

　　Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead waslaid. And Jesus lifted up His eyes and said, Father, I thank Thee thatThou hast heard Me.

　　And I knew that Thou hearest Me always; but because of the peoplewhich stand by I said it, that they may believe that Thou hast sentMe.

　　And when He thus had spoken, He cried with a loud voice, Lazarus,come forth.

　　And he that was dead came forth."

　　(She read loudly, cold and trembling with ecstasy, as though shewere seeing it before her eyes.)

　　"Bound hand and foot with graveclothes; and his face was bound aboutwith a napkin. Jesus saith unto them, Loose him and let him go.

　　Then many of the Jews which came to Mary and had seen the thingswhich Jesus did believed on Him."

　　She could read no more, closed the book and got up from her chairquickly.

　　"That is all about the raising of Lazarus," she whispered severelyand abruptly, and turning away she stood motionless, not daring toraise her eyes to him. She still trembled feverishly. The candle-endwas flickering out in the battered candlestick, dimly lighting up inthe poverty-stricken room the murderer and the harlot who had sostrangely been reading together the eternal book. Five minutes or morepassed.

　　"I came to speak of something," Raskolnikov said aloud, frowning. Hegot up and went to Sonia. She lifted her eyes to him in silence. Hisface was particularly stern and there was a sort of savagedetermination in it.

　　"I have abandoned my family to-day," he said, "my mother and sister.I am not going to see them. I've broken with them completely."

　　"What for?" asked Sonia amazed. Her recent meeting with his motherand sister had left a great impression which she could not analyse.She heard his news almost with horror.

　　"I have only you now," he added. "Let us go together.... I've cometo you, we are both accursed, let us go our way together!"

　　His eyes glittered "as though he were mad," Sonia thought, in herturn.

　　"Go where?" she asked in alarm and she involuntarily stepped back.

　　"How do I know? I only know it's the same road, I know that andnothing more. It's the same goal!"

　　She looked at him and understood nothing. She knew only that hewas terribly, infinitely unhappy.

　　"No one of them will understand, if you tell them, but I haveunderstood. I need you, that is why I have come to you."

　　"I don't understand," whispered Sonia.

　　"You'll understand later. Haven't you done the same? You, too,have transgressed... have had the strength to transgress. You havelaid hands on yourself, you have destroyed a life... your own (it'sall the same!). You might have lived in spirit and understanding,but you'll end in the Hay Market.... But you won't be able to standit, and if you remain alone you'll go out of your mind like me. Youare like a mad creature already. So we must go together on the sameroad! Let us go!"

　　"What for? What's all this for?" said Sonia, strangely and violentlyagitated by his words.

　　"What for? Because you can't remain like this, that's why! Youmust look things straight in the face at last, and not weep like achild and cry that God won't allow it. What will happen, if you shouldreally be taken to the hospital to-morrow? She is mad and inconsumption, she'll soon die, and the children? Do you mean to tell mePolenka won't come to grief? Haven't you seen children here at thestreet corners sent out by their mothers to beg? I've found outwhere those mothers live and in what surroundings. Children can'tremain children there! At seven the child is vicious and a thief.Yet children, you know, are the image of Christ: 'theirs is thekingdom of Heaven.' He bade us honour and love them, they are thehumanity of the future...."

　　"What's to be done, what's to be done?" repeated Sonia, weepinghysterically and wringing her hands.

　　"What's to be done? Break what must be broken, once for all,that's all, and take the suffering on oneself. What, you don'tunderstand? You'll understand later.... Freedom and power, and aboveall, power! Over all trembling creation and all the antheap!... That'sthe goal, remember that! That's my farewell message. Perhaps it'sthe last time I shall speak to you. If I don't come to-morrow,you'll hear of it all, and then remember these words. And some daylater on, in years to come, you'll understand perhaps what they meant.If I come to-morrow, I'll tell you who killed Lizaveta.... Good-bye."

　　Sonia started with terror.

　　"Why, do you know who killed her?" she asked, chilled with horror,looking wildly at him.

　　"I know and will tell... you, only you. I have chosen you out. I'mnot coming to you to ask forgiveness, but simply to tell you. Ichose you out long ago to hear this, when your father talked of youand when Lizaveta was alive, I thought of it. Good-bye, don't shakehands. To-morrow!"

　　He went out. Sonia gazed at him as at a madman. But she herselfwas like one insane and felt it. Her head was going round.

　　"Good heavens, how does he know who killed Lizaveta? What didthose words mean? It's awful!" But at the same time the idea did notenter her head, not for a moment! "Oh, he must be terribly unhappy!...He has abandoned his mother and sister.... What for? What hashappened? And what had he in his mind? What did he say to her? Hehad kissed her foot and said... said (yes, he had said it clearly)that he could not live without her.... Oh, merciful heavens!"

　　Sonia spent the whole night feverish and delirious. She jumped upfrom time to time, wept and wrung her hands, then sank again intofeverish sleep and dreamt of Polenka, Katerina Ivanovna andLizaveta, of reading the gospel and him... him with pale face, withburning eyes... kissing her feet, weeping.

　　On the other side of the door on the right, which divided Sonia'sroom from Madame Resslich's flat, was a room which long stood empty. Acard was fixed on the gate and a notice stuck in the windows overthe canal advertising it to let. Sonia had long been accustomed to theroom's being uninhabited. But all that time Mr. Svidrigailov hadbeen standing, listening at the door of the empty room. WhenRaskolnikov went out he stood still, thought a moment, went ontiptoe to his own room which adjoined the empty one, brought a chairand noiselessly carried it to the door that led to Sonia's room. Theconversation had struck him as interesting and remarkable, and hehad greatly enjoyed it- so much so that he brought a chair that hemight not in the future, to-morrow, for instance, have to endure theinconvenience of standing a whole hour, but might listen in comfort.

　　Chapter Five

　　WHEN NEXT morning at eleven o'clock punctually Raskolnikov went intothe department of the investigation of criminal causes and sent hisname in to Porfiry Petrovitch, he was surprised at being keptwaiting so long: it was at least ten minutes before he was summoned.He had expected that they would pounce upon him. But he stood in thewaiting-room, and people, who apparently had nothing to do with him,were continually passing to and fro before him. In the next room whichlooked like an office, several clerks were sitting writing andobviously they had no notion who or what Raskolnikov might be. Helooked uneasily and suspiciously about him to see whether there wasnot some guard, some mysterious watch being kept on him to prevent hisescape. But there was nothing of the sort: he saw only the faces ofclerks absorbed in petty details, then other people, no one seemedto have any concern with him. He might go where he liked for them. Theconviction grew stronger in him that if that enigmatic man ofyesterday, that phantom sprung out of the earth, had seeneverything, they would not have let him stand and wait like that.And would they have waited till he elected to appear at eleven? Eitherthe man had not yet given information, or... or simply he knewnothing, had seen nothing (and how could he have seen anything?) andso all that had happened to him the day before was again a phantomexaggerated by his sick and overstrained imagination. Thisconjecture had begun to grow strong the day before, in the midst ofall his alarm and despair. Thinking it all over now and preparingfor a fresh conflict, he was suddenly aware that he was trembling- andhe felt a rush of indignation at the thought that he was tremblingwith fear at facing that hateful Porfiry Petrovitch. What he dreadedabove all was meeting that man again; he hated him with an intense,unmitigated hatred and was afraid his hatred might betray him. Hisindignation was such that he ceased trembling at once; he made readyto go in with a cold and arrogant bearing and vowed to himself to keepas silent as possible, to watch and listen and for once at least tocontrol his overstrained nerves. At that moment he was summoned toPorfiry Petrovitch.

　　He found Porfiry Petrovitch alone in his study. His study was a roomneither large nor small, furnished with a large writing-table, thatstood before a sofa, upholstered in checked material, a bureau, abookcase in the corner and several chairs- all government furniture,of polished yellow wood. In the further wall there was a closeddoor, beyond it there were, no doubt, other rooms. On Raskolnikov'sentrance Porfiry Petrovitch had at once closed the door by which hehad come in and they remained alone. He met his visitor with anapparently genial and good-tempered air, and it was only after a fewminutes that Raskolnikov saw signs of a certain awkwardness in him, asthough he had been thrown out of his reckoning or caught insomething very secret.

　　"Ah, my dear fellow! Here you are... in our domain"... beganPorfiry, holding out both hands to him. "Come, sit down, old man... orperhaps you don't like to be called 'my dear fellow' and 'oldman!'-tout court? Please don't think it too familiar.... Here, onthe sofa."

　　Raskolnikov sat down, keeping his eyes fixed on him. "In ourdomain," the apologies for familiarity, the French phrase toutcourt, were all characteristic signs.

　　"He held out both hands to me, but he did not give me one- he drewit back in time," struck him suspiciously. Both were watching eachother, but when their eyes met, quick as lightning they looked away.

　　"I brought you this paper... about the watch. Here it is. Is itall right or shall I copy it again?"

　　"What? A paper? Yes, yes, don't be uneasy, it's all right,"Porfiry Petrovitch said as though in haste, and after he had said ithe took the paper and looked at it. "Yes, it's all right. Nothing moreis needed," he declared with the same rapidity and he laid the paperon the table.

　　A minute later when he was talking of something else he took it fromthe table and put it on his bureau.

　　"I believe you said yesterday you would like to question me...formally... about my acquaintance with the murdered woman?"Raskolnikov was beginning again. "Why did I put in 'I believe'" passedthrough his mind in a flash. "Why am I so uneasy at having put in that'I believe'?" came in a second flash. And he suddenly felt that hisuneasiness at the mere contact with Porfiry, at the first words, atthe first looks, had grown in an instant to monstrous proportions, andthat this was fearfully dangerous. His nerves were quivering, hisemotion was increasing. "It's bad, it's bad! I shall say too muchagain."

　　"Yes, yes, yes! There's no hurry, there's no hurry," mutteredPorfiry Petrovitch, moving to and fro about the table without anyapparent aim, as it were making dashes towards the window, thebureau and the table, at one moment avoiding Raskolnikov'ssuspicious glance, then again standing still and looking himstraight in the face.

　　His fat round little figure looked very strange, like a ball rollingfrom one side to the other and rebounding back.

　　"We've plenty of time. Do you smoke? have you your own? Here, acigarette!" he went on, offering his visitor a cigarette. "You knowI am receiving you here, but my own quarters are through there, youknow, my government quarters. But I am living outside for the time,I had to have some repairs done here. It's almost finished now....Government quarters, you know, are a capital thing. Eh, what do youthink?"

　　"Yes, a capital thing," answered Raskolnikov, looking at himalmost ironically.

　　"A capital thing, a capital thing," repeated Porfiry Petrovitch,as though he had just thought of something quite different. "Yes, acapital thing," he almost shouted at last, suddenly staring atRaskolnikov and stopping short two steps from him.

　　This stupid repetition was too incongruous in its ineptitude withthe serious, brooding and enigmatic glance he turned upon his visitor.

　　But this stirred Raskolnikov's spleen more than ever and he couldnot resist an ironical and rather incautious challenge.

　　"Tell me, please," he asked suddenly, looking almost insolently athim and taking a kind of pleasure in his own insolence. "I believeit's a sort of legal rule, a sort of legal tradition- for allinvestigating lawyers- to begin their attack from afar, with atrivial, or at least an irrelevant subject, so as to encourage, orrather, to divert the man they are cross-examining, to disarm hiscaution and then all at once to give him an unexpected knockdownblow with some fatal question. Isn't that so? It's a sacred tradition,mentioned, I fancy, in all the manuals of the art?"

　　"Yes, yes.... Why, do you imagine that was why I spoke aboutgovernment quarters... eh?"

　　And as he said this Porfiry Petrovitch screwed up his eyes andwinked; a good-humoured, crafty look passed over his face. Thewrinkles on his forehead were smoothed out, his eyes contracted, hisfeatures broadened and he suddenly went off into a nervous prolongedlaugh, shaking all over and looking Raskolnikov straight in theface. The latter forced himself to laugh, too, but when Porfiry,seeing that he was laughing, broke into such a guffaw that he turnedalmost crimson, Raskolnikov's repulsion overcame all precaution; heleft off laughing, scowled and stared with hatred at Porfiry,keeping his eyes fixed on him while his intentionally prolongedlaughter lasted. There was lack of precaution on both sides,however, for Porfiry Petrovitch seemed to be laughing in his visitor'sface and to be very little disturbed at the annoyance with which thevisitor received it. The latter fact was very significant inRaskolnikov's eyes: he saw that Porfiry Petrovitch had not beenembarrassed just before either, but that he, Raskolnikov, hadperhaps fallen into a trap; that there must be something, somemotive here unknown to him; that, perhaps, everything was in readinessand in another moment would break upon him...

　　He went straight to the point at once, rose from his seat and tookhis cap.

　　"Porfiry Petrovitch," he began resolutely, though withconsiderable irritation, "yesterday you expressed a desire that Ishould come to you for some inquiries (he laid special stress on theword 'inquiries'). I have come and, if you have anything to ask me,ask it, and if not, allow me to withdraw. I have no time tospare.... I have to be at the funeral of that man who was run over, ofwhom you... know also," he added, feeling angry at once at having madethis addition and more irritated at his anger, "I am sick of it all,do you hear, and have long been. It's partly what made me ill. Inshort," he shouted, feeling that the phrase about his illness wasstill more out of place, "in short, kindly examine me or let me go, atonce. And if you must examine me, do so in the proper form! I will notallow you to do so otherwise, and so meanwhile, good-bye, as we haveevidently nothing to keep us now."

　　"Good heavens! What do you mean? What shall I question you about?"cackled Porfiry Petrovitch with a change of tone, instantly leavingoff laughing. "Please don't disturb yourself," he began fidgeting fromplace to place and fussily making Raskolnikov sit down. "There's nohurry, there's no hurry, it's all nonsense. Oh, no, I'm very gladyou've come to see me at last... I look upon you simply as avisitor. And as for my confounded laughter, please excuse it, RodionRomanovitch. Rodion Romanovitch? That is your name?... It's my nerves,you tickled me so with your witty observation; I assure you, sometimesI shake with laughter like an India-rubber ball for half an hour ata time.... I'm often afraid of an attack of paralysis. Do sit down.Please do, or I shall think you are angry..."

　　Raskolnikov did not speak; he listened, watching him, still frowningangrily. He did sit down, but still held his cap.

　　"I must tell you one thing about myself, my dear RodionRomanovitch," Porfiry Petrovitch continued, moving about the roomand again avoiding his visitor's eyes. "You see, I'm a bachelor, a manof no consequence and not used to society; besides, I have nothingbefore me, I'm set, I'm running to seed and... and have you noticed,Rodion Romanovitch, that in our Petersburg circles, if two clevermen meet who are not intimate, but respect each other, like you andme, it takes them half an hour before they can find a subject forconversation- they are dumb, they sit opposite each other and feelawkward. Every one has subjects of conversation, ladies forinstance... people in high society always have their subjects ofconversation, c'est de rigueur, but people of the middle sort like us,thinking people that is, are always tongue-tied and awkward. What isthe reason of it? Whether it is the lack of public interest, orwhether it is we are so honest we don't want to deceive one another, Idon't know. What do you think? Do put down your cap, it looks as ifyou were just going, it makes me uncomfortable... I am sodelighted..."

　　Raskolnikov put down his cap and continued listening in silence witha serious frowning face to the vague and empty chatter of PorfiryPetrovitch. "Does he really want to distract my attention with hissilly babble?"

　　"I can't offer you coffee here; but why not spend five minuteswith a friend," Porfiry pattered on, "and you know all theseofficial duties... please don't mind my running up and down, excuseit, my dear fellow, I am very much afraid of offending you, butexercise is absolutely indispensable for me. I'm always sitting and soglad to be moving about for five minutes... I suffer from my sedentarylife... I always intend to join a gymnasium; they say that officialsof all ranks, even Privy Councillors may be seen skipping gaily there;there you have it, modern science... yes, yes.... But as for my dutieshere, inquiries and all such formalities... you mentioned inquiriesyourself just now... I assure you these interrogations are sometimesmore embarrassing for the interrogator than for the interrogated....You made the observation yourself just now very aptly and wittily.(Raskolnikov had made no observation of the kind.) One gets into amuddle! A regular muddle! One keeps harping on the same note, like adrum! There is to be a reform and we shall be called by a differentname, at least, he-he-he! And as for our legal tradition, as you sowittily called it, I thoroughly agree with you. Every prisoner ontrial, even the rudest peasant knows, that they begin by disarming himwith irrelevant questions (as you so happily put it) and then deal hima knock-down blow, he-he-he!- your felicitous compacts son, he-he!So you really imagined that I meant by government quarters... he-he!You are an ironical person. Come. I won't go on! Ah, by the way,yes! One word leads to another. You spoke of formality just now,apropos of the inquiry, you know. But what's the use of formality?In many cases it's nonsense. Sometimes one has a friendly chat andgets a good deal more out of it. One can always fall back onformality, allow me to assure you. And after all, what does itamount to? An examining lawyer cannot be bounded by formality at everystep. The work of investigation is, so to speak, a free art in its ownway, he-he-he!"

　　Porfiry Petrovitch took breath a moment. He had simply babbled onuttering empty phrases, letting slip a few enigmatic words and againreverting to incoherence. He was almost running about the room, movinghis fat little legs quicker and quicker, looking at the ground, withhis right hand behind his back, while with his left makinggesticulations that were extraordinarily incongruous with his words.Raskolnikov suddenly noticed that as he ran about the room he seemedtwice to stop for a moment near the door, as though he were listening.

　　"Is he expecting anything?"

　　"You are certainly quite right about it," Porfiry began gaily,looking with extraordinary simplicity at Raskolnikov (which startledhim and instantly put him on his guard), "certainly quite right inlaughing so wittily at our legal forms, he-he! Some of these elaboratepsychological methods are exceedingly ridiculous and perhapsuseless, if one adheres too closely to the forms. Yes... I amtalking of forms again. Well, if I recognise, or more strictlyspeaking, if I suspect some one or other to be a criminal in anycase entrusted to me... you're reading for the law, of course,Rodion Romanovitch?"

　　"Yes, I was..."

　　"Well, then it is a precedent for you for the future- though don'tsuppose I should venture to instruct you after the articles youpublish about crime! No, I simply make bold to state it by way offact, if I took this man or that for a criminal, why, I ask, shouldI worry him prematurely, even though I had evidence against him? Inone case I may be bound, for instance, to arrest a man at once, butanother may be in quite a different position, you know, so whyshouldn't I let him walk about the town a bit, he-he-he! But I see youdon't quite understand, so I'll give you a clearer example. If I puthim in prison too soon, I may very likely give him, so to speak, moralsupport, he-he! You're laughing?"

　　Raskolnikov had no idea of laughing. He was sitting withcompressed lips, his feverish eyes fixed on Porfiry Petrovitch's.

　　"Yes that is the case, with some types especially, for men are sodifferent. You say evidence. Well, there may be evidence. Butevidence, you know, can generally be taken two ways. I am an examininglawyer and a weak man, I confess it. I should like to make a proof, soto say, mathematically clear, I should like to make a chain ofevidence such as twice two are four, it ought to be a direct,irrefutable proof! And if I shut him up too soon- even though Imight be convinced he was the man, I should very likely be deprivingmyself of the means of getting further evidence against him. Andhow? By giving him, so to speak, a definite position, I shall puthim out of suspense and set his mind at rest, so that he willretreat into his shell. They say that at Sevastopol, soon afterAlma, the clever people were in a terrible fright that the enemy wouldattack openly and take Sevastopol at once. But when they saw thatthe enemy preferred a regular siege, they were delighted, I am toldand reassured, for the thing would drag on for two months at least.You're laughing, you don't believe me again? Of course, you'reright, too. You're right, you're right. These are an special cases,I admit. But you must observe this, my dear Rodion Romanovitch, thegeneral case, the case for which all legal forms and rules areintended, for which they are calculated and laid down in books, doesnot exist at all, for the reason that every case, every crime forinstance, so soon as it actually occurs, at once becomes athoroughly special case and sometimes a case unlike any that's gonebefore. Very comic cases of that sort sometimes occur. If I leaveone man quite alone, if I don't touch him and don't worry him, but lethim know or at least suspect every moment that I know all about it andam watching him day and night, and if he is in continual suspicion andterror, he'll be bound to lose his head. He'll come of himself, ormaybe do something which will make it as plain as twice two arefour- it's delightful. It may be so with a simple peasant, but withone of our sort, an intelligent man cultivated on a certain side, it'sa dead certainty. For, my dear fellow, it's a very important matter toknow on what side a man is cultivated. And then there are nerves,there are nerves, you have overlooked them! Why, they are all sick,nervous and irritable!... And then how they all suffer from spleen!That I assure you is a regular gold mine for us. And it's no anxietyto me, his running about the town free! Let him, let him walk aboutfor a bit! I know well enough that I've caught him and that he won'tescape me. Where could he escape to, he-he? Abroad, perhaps? A Polewill escape abroad, but not here, especially as I am watching and havetaken measures. Will he escape into the depths of the country perhaps?But you know, peasants live there, real rude Russian peasants. Amodern cultivated man would prefer prison to living with suchstrangers as our peasants. He-he! But that's all nonsense, and onthe surface. It's not merely that he has nowhere to run to, he ispsychologically unable to escape me, he-he! What an expression!Through a law of nature he can't escape me if he had anywhere to go.Have you seen a butterfly round a candle? That's how he will keepcircling and circling round me. Freedom will lose its attractions.He'll begin to brood, hell weave a tangle round himself, he'll worryhimself to death! What's more he will provide me with a mathematicalproof- if I only give him long enough interval.... And he'll keepcircling round me, getting nearer and nearer and then- flop! He'll flystraight into my mouth and I'll swallow him, and that will be veryamusing, he-he-he! You don't believe me?"

　　Raskolnikov made no reply; he sat pale and motionless, stillgazing with the same intensity into Porfiry's face.

　　"It's a lesson," he thought, turning cold. "This is beyond the catplaying with a mouse, like yesterday. He can't be showing off hispower with no motive... prompting me; he is far too clever for that...he must have another object. What is it? It's all nonsense, my friend,you are pretending, to scare me! You've no proofs and the man I sawhad no real existence. You simply want to make me lose my head, towork me up beforehand and so to crush me. But you are wrong, you won'tdo it! But why give me such a hint? Is he reckoning on my shatterednerves? No, my friend, you are wrong, you won't do it even thoughyou have some trap for me... let us see what you have in store forme."

　　And he braced himself to face a terrible and unknown ordeal. Attimes he longed to fall on Porfiry and strangle him. This anger waswhat he dreaded from the beginning. He felt that his parched lips wereflecked with foam, his heart was throbbing. But he was stilldetermined not to speak till the right moment. He realised that thiswas the best policy in his position, because instead of saying toomuch he would be irritating his enemy by his silence and provoking himinto speaking too freely. Anyhow, this was what he hoped for.

　　"No, I see you don't believe me, you think I am playing a harmlessjoke on you," Porfiry began again, getting more and more lively,chuckling at every instant and again pacing round the room. "And, tobe sure, you're right: God has given me a figure that can awakennone but comic ideas in other people; a buffoon; but let me tell youand I repeat it, excuse an old man, my dear Rodion Romanovitch, youare a man still young, so to say, in your first youth and so you putintellect above everything, like all young people. Playful wit andabstract arguments fascinate you and that's for all the world like theold Austrian Hofkriegsrath, as far as I can judge of militarymatters that is: on paper they'd beaten Napoleon and taken himprisoner, and there in their study they worked it all out in thecleverest fashion, but look you, General Mack surrendered with all hisarmy, he-he-he! I see, I see, Rodion Romanovitch, you are laughingat a civilian like me, taking examples out of military history! ButI can't help it, it's my weakness. I am fond of military science.And I'm ever so fond of reading all military histories. I've certainlymissed my proper career. I ought to have been in the army, upon myword I ought. I shouldn't have been a Napoleon, but I might havebeen a major, he-he-he! Well, I'll tell you the whole truth, my dearfellow, about this special case, I mean: actual fact and a man'stemperament, my dear sir, are weighty matters and it's astonishing howthey sometimes deceive the sharpest calculation! I- listen to an oldman- am speaking seriously, Rodion Romanovitch (as he said thisPorfiry Petrovitch who was scarcely five and thirty actually seemed tohave grown old; even his voice changed and he seemed to shrinktogether) moreover, I'm a candid man... am I a candid man or not? Whatdo you say? I fancy I really am: I tell you these things for nothingand don't even expect a reward for it, he-he! Well, to proceed, wit inmy opinion is a splendid thing, it is, so to say, an adornment ofnature and a consolation of life, and what tricks it can play! So thatit sometimes is hard for a poor examining lawyer to know where heis, especially when he's liable to be carried away by his own fancy,too, for you know he is a man after all. But the poor fellow issaved by the criminal's temperament, worse luck for him! But youngpeople carried away by their own wit don't think of that 'when theyoverstep all obstacles' as you wittily and cleverly expressed ityesterday. He will lie- that is, the man who is a special case, theincognito, and he will lie well, in the cleverest fashion; you mightthink he would triumph and enjoy the fruits of his wit, but at themost interesting, the most flagrant moment he will faint. Of coursethere may be illness and a stuffy room as well, but anyway! Anywayhe's given us the idea! He lied incomparably, but he didn't reckonon his temperament. That's what betrays him! Another time he will becarried away by his playful wit into making fun of the man whosuspects him, he will turn pale as it were on purpose to mislead,but his paleness will be too natural, too much like the real thing,again he has given us an idea! Though his questioner may be deceivedat first, he will think differently next day if he is not a fool, and,of course, it is like that at every step! He puts himself forwardwhere he is not wanted, speaks continually when he ought to keepsilent, brings in all sorts of allegorical allusions, he-he! Comes andasks why didn't you take me long ago, he-he-he! And that can happen,you know, with the cleverest man, the psychologist, the literaryman. The temperament reflects everything like a mirror! Gaze into itand admire what you see! But why are you so pale, RodionRomanovitch? Is the room stuffy? Shall I open the window?"

　　"Oh, don't trouble, please," cried Raskolnikov and he suddenly brokeinto a laugh. "Please don't trouble."

　　Porfiry stood facing him, paused a moment and suddenly he toolaughed. Raskolnikov got up from the sofa, abruptly checking hishysterical laughter.

　　"Porfiry Petrovitch," he began, speaking loudly and distinctly,though his legs trembled and he could scarcely stand. "I see clearlyat last that you actually suspect me of murdering that old woman andher sister Lizaveta. Let me tell you for my part that I am sick ofthis. If you find that you have a right to prosecute me legally, toarrest me, then prosecute me, arrest me. But I will not let myselfbe jeered at to my face and worried..."

　　His lips trembled, his eyes glowed with fury and he could notrestrain his voice.

　　"I won't allow it!" he shouted, bringing his fist down on the table."Do you hear that, Porfiry Petrovitch? I won't allow it."

　　"Good heavens! What does it mean?" cried Porfiry Petrovitch,apparently quite frightened. "Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow, whatis the matter with you?"

　　"I won't allow it," Raskolnikov shouted again.

　　"Hush, my dear man! They'll hear and come in. Just think, what couldwe say to them?" Porfiry Petrovitch whispered in horror, bringinghis face close to Raskolnikov's.

　　"I won't allow it, I won't allow it," Raskolnikov repeatedmechanically, but he too spoke in a sudden whisper.

　　Porfiry turned quickly and ran to open the window.

　　"Some fresh air! And you must have some water, my dear fellow.You're ill!" and he was running to the door to call for some when hefound a decanter of water in the corner. "Come, drink a little," hewhispered, rushing up to him with the decanter. "It will be sure to doyou good."

　　Porfiry Petrovitch's alarm and sympathy were so natural thatRaskolnikov was silent and began looking at him with wild curiosity.He did not take the water, however.

　　"Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow, you'll drive yourself out ofyour mind, I assure you, ach, ach! Have some water, do drink alittle."

　　He forced him to take the glass. Raskolnikov raised itmechanically to his lips, but set it on the table again with disgust.

　　"Yes, you've had a little attack! You'll bring back your illnessagain, my dear fellow," Porfiry Petrovitch cackled with friendlysympathy, though he still looked rather disconcerted. "Good heavens,you must take more care of yourself! Dmitri Prokofitch was here,came to see me yesterday- I know, I know, I've a nasty, ironicaltemper, but what they made of it!... Good heavens, he came yesterdayafter you'd been. We dined and he talked and talked away, and Icould only throw up my hands in despair! Did he come from you? Butdo sit down, for mercy's sake, sit down!"

　　"No, not from me, but I knew he went to you and why he went,"Raskolnikov answered sharply.

　　"You knew?"

　　"I knew. What of it?"

　　"Why this, Rodion Romanovitch, that I know more than that about you;I know about everything. I know how you went to take a flat at nightwhen it was dark and how you rang the bell and asked about theblood, so that the workmen and the porter did not know what to make ofit. Yes, I understand your state of mind at that time... but you'lldrive yourself mad like that, upon my word! You'll lose your head!You're full of generous indignation at the wrongs you've received,first from destiny, and then from the police officers, and so you rushfrom one thing to another to force them to speak out and make an endof it all, because you are sick of all this suspicion and foolishness.That's so, isn't it? I have guessed how you feel, haven't I? Only inthat way you'll lose your head and Razumihin's, too; he's too good aman for such a position, you must know that. You are ill and he isgood and your illness is infectious for him... I'll tell you aboutit when you are more yourself.... But do sit down, for goodness' sake.Please rest, you look shocking, do sit down."

　　Raskolnikov sat down; he no longer shivered, he was hot all over. Inamazement he listened with strained attention to Porfiry Petrovitchwho still seemed frightened as he looked after him with friendlysolicitude. But he did not believe a word he said, though he felt astrange inclination to believe. Porfiry's unexpected words about theflat had utterly overwhelmed him. "How can it be, he knows about theflat then," he thought suddenly, "and he tells it me himself!"

　　"Yes, in our legal practice there was a case almost exactly similar,a case of morbid psychology," Porfiry went on quickly. "A manconfessed to murder and how he kept it up! It was a regularhallucination; he brought forward facts, he imposed upon every one andwhy? He had been partly, but only partly, unintentionally the cause ofa murder and when he knew that he had given the murderers theopportunity, he sank into dejection, it got on his mind and turned hisbrain, he began imagining things and he persuaded himself that hewas the murderer. But at last the High Court of Appeals went into itand the poor fellow was acquitted and put under proper care. Thanks tothe Court of Appeals! Tut-tut-tut! Why, my dear fellow, you maydrive yourself into delirium if you have the impulse to work upon yournerves, to go ringing bells at night and asking about blood! I'vestudied all this morbid psychology in my practice. A man issometimes tempted to jump out of a window or from a belfry. Just thesame with bell-ringing.... It's all illness, Rodion Romanovitch! Youhave begun to neglect your illness. You should consult anexperienced doctor, what's the good of that fat fellow? You arelightheaded! You were delirious when you did all this!"

　　For a moment Raskolnikov felt everything going round.

　　"Is it possible, is it possible," flashed through his mind, "that heis still lying? He can't be, he can't be." He rejected that idea,feeling to what a degree of fury it might drive him, feeling that thatfury might drive him mad.

　　"I was not delirious. I knew what I was doing," he cried,straining every faculty to penetrate Porfiry's game, "I was quitemyself, do you hear?"

　　"Yes, I hear and understand. You said yesterday you were notdelirious, you were particularly emphatic about it! I understand allyou can tell me! A-ach!... Listen, Rodion Romanovitch, my dear fellow.If you were actually a criminal, or were somehow mixed up in thisdamnable business, would you insist that you were not delirious but infull possession of your faculties? And so emphatically andpersistently? Would it be possible? Quite impossible, to mythinking. If you had anything on your conscience, you certainlyought to insist that you were delirious. That's so, isn't it?"

　　There was a note of slyness in this inquiry. Raskolnikov drew backon the sofa as Porfiry bent over him and stared in silent perplexityat him.

　　"Another thing about Razumihin- you certainly ought to have saidthat he came of his own accord, to have concealed your part in it! Butyou don't conceal it! You lay stress on his coming at yourinstigation."

　　Raskolnikov had not done so. A chill went down his back.

　　"You keep telling lies," he said slowly and weakly, twisting hislips into a sickly smile, "you are trying again to show that youknow all my game, that you know all I shall say beforehand," hesaid, conscious himself that he was not weighing his words as heought. "You want to frighten me... or you are simply laughing atme..."

　　He still stared at him as he said this and again there was a lightof intense hatred in his eyes.

　　"You keep lying," he said. "You know perfectly well that the bestpolicy for the criminal is to tell the truth as nearly aspossible... to conceal as little as possible. I don't believe you!"

　　"What a wily person you are!" Porfiry tittered, "there's no catchingyou; you've a perfect monomania. So you don't believe me? But stillyou do believe me, you believe a quarter; I'll soon make you believethe whole, because I have a sincere liking for you and genuinelywish you good."

　　Raskolnikov's lips trembled.

　　"Yes, I do," went on Porfiry, touching Raskolnikov's arm genially,"you must take care of your illness. Besides, your mother and sisterare here now; you must think of them. You must soothe and comfort themand you do nothing but frighten them..."

　　"What has that to do with you? How do you know it? What concern isit of yours? You are keeping watch on me and want to let me know it?"

　　"Good heavens! Why, I learnt it all from you yourself! You don'tnotice that in your excitement you tell me and others everything. FromRazumihin, too, I learnt a number of interesting details yesterday.No, you interrupted me, but I must tell you that, for all your wit,your suspiciousness makes you lose the common-sense view of things. Toreturn to bell-ringing, for instance. I, an examining lawyer, havebetrayed a precious thing like that, a real fact (for it is a factworth having), and you see nothing in it! Why, if I had theslightest suspicion of you, should I have acted like that? No, Ishould first have disarmed your suspicions and not let you see Iknew of that fact, should have diverted your attention and suddenlyhave dealt you a knock-down blow (your expression) saying: 'And whatwere you doing, sir, pray, at ten or nearly eleven at the murderedwoman's flat and why did you ring the bell and why did you ask aboutblood? And why did you invite the porters to go with you to the policestation, to the lieutenant?' That's how I ought to have acted if I hada grain of suspicion of you. I ought to have taken your evidence indue form, searched your lodging and perhaps have arrested you,too... so I have no suspicion of you, since I have not done that!But you can't look at it normally and you see nothing, I say again."

　　Raskolnikov started so that Porfiry Petrovitch could not fail toperceive it.

　　"You are lying all the while," he cried, "I don't know yourobject, but you are lying. You did not speak like that just now andI cannot be mistaken!"

　　"I am lying?" Porfiry repeated, apparently incensed, butpreserving a good-humoured and ironical face, as though he were not inthe least concerned at Raskolnikov's opinion of him. "I am lying...but how did I treat you just now, I, the examining lawyer? Promptingyou and giving you every means for your defence; illness, I said,delirium, injury, melancholy and the police officers and all therest of it? Ah! He-he-he! Though, indeed, all those psychologicalmeans of defence are not very reliable and cut both ways: illness,delirium, I don't remember- that's all right, but why, my good sir, inyour illness and in your delirium were you haunted by just thosedelusions and not by any others? There may have been others, eh?He-he-he!"

　　Raskolnikov looked haughtily and contemptuously at him.

　　"Briefly," he said loudly and imperiously, rising to his feet and inso doing pushing Porfiry back a little, "briefly, I want to know, doyou acknowledge me perfectly free from suspicion or not? Tell me,Porfiry Petrovitch, tell me once for all and make haste!"

　　"What a business I'm having with you!" cried Porfiry with aperfectly good-humoured, sly and composed face. "And why do you wantto know, why do you want to know so much, since they haven't begunto worry you? Why, you are like a child asking for matches! And whyare you so uneasy? Why do you force yourself upon us, eh? He-he-he!"

　　"I repeat," Raskolnikov cried furiously, "that I can't put up withit!"

　　"With what? Uncertainty?" interrupted Porfiry.

　　"Don't jeer at me! I won't have it! I tell you I won't have it. Ican't and I won't, do you hear, do you hear?" he shouted, bringing hisfist down on the table again.

　　"Hush! Hush! They'll overhear! I warn you seriously, take care ofyourself. I am not joking," Porfiry whispered, but this time there wasnot the look of old womanish good-nature and alarm in his face. Now hewas peremptory, stern, frowning and for once laying aside allmystification.

　　But this was only for an instant. Raskolnikov, bewildered,suddenly fell into actual frenzy, but, strange to say, he again obeyedthe command to speak quietly, though he was in a perfect paroxysm offury.

　　"I will not allow myself to be tortured," he whispered, instantlyrecognising with hatred that he could not help obeying the command anddriven to even greater fury by the thought. "Arrest me, search me, butkindly act in due form and don't play with me! Don't dare!"

　　"Don't worry about the form," Porfiry interrupted with the samesly smile, as it were, gloating with enjoyment over Raskolnikov. "Iinvited you to see me quite in a friendly way."

　　"I don't want your friendship and I spit on it! Do you hear? And,here, I take my cap and go. What will you say now if you mean toarrest me?"

　　He took up his cap and went to the door.

　　"And won't you see my little surprise?" chuckled Porfiry, againtaking him by the arm and stopping him at the door.

　　He seemed to become more playful and good-humoured which maddenedRaskolnikov.

　　"What surprise?" he asked, standing still and looking at Porfiryin alarm.

　　"My little surprise, it's sitting there behind the door, he-he-he!(He pointed to the locked door.) I locked him in that he should notescape."

　　"What is it? Where? What?..."

　　Raskolnikov walked to the door and would have opened it, but itwas locked.

　　"It's locked, here is the key!"

　　And he brought a key out of his pocket.

　　"You are lying," roared Raskolnikov without restraint, "you lie, youdamned punchinello!" and he rushed at Porfiry who retreated to theother door, not at all alarmed.

　　"I understand it all! You are lying and mocking so that I may betraymyself to you..."

　　"Why, you could not betray yourself any further, my dear RodionRomanovitch. You are in a passion. Don't shout, I shall call theclerks."

　　"You are lying! Call the clerks! You knew I was ill and tried towork me into a frenzy to make me betray myself, that was yourobject! Produce your facts! I understand it all. You've no evidence,you have only wretched rubbishly suspicions like Zametov's! You knewmy character, you wanted to drive me to fury and then to knock me downwith priests and deputies.... Are you waiting for them? eh! What areyou waiting for? Where are they? Produce them?"

　　"Why deputies, my good man? What things people will imagine! Andto do so would not be acting in form as you say, you don't know thebusiness, my dear fellow.... And there's no escaping form, as yousee," Porfiry muttered, listening at the door through which a noisecould be heard.

　　"Ah, they're coming," cried Raskolnikov. "You've sent for them!You expected them! Well, produce them all: your deputies, yourwitnesses, what you like!... I am ready!"

　　But at this moment a strange incident occurred, something sounexpected that neither Raskolnikov nor Porfiry Petrovitch couldhave looked for such a conclusion to their interview.

　　Chapter Six

　　WHEN HE remembered the scene afterwards, this is how Raskolnikov sawit.

　　The noise behind the door increased, and suddenly the door wasopened a little.

　　"What is it?" cried Porfiry Petrovitch, annoyed. "Why, I gaveorders..."

　　For an instant there was no answer, but it was evident that therewere several persons at the door, and that they were apparentlypushing somebody back.

　　"What is it?" Porfiry Petrovitch repeated, uneasily.

　　"The prisoner Nikolay has been brought," some one answered.

　　"He is not wanted! Take him away! Let him wait! What's he doinghere? How irregular!" cried Porfiry, rushing to the door.

　　"But he..." began the same voice, and suddenly ceased.

　　Two seconds, not more, were spent in actual struggle, then someone gave a violent shove, and then a man, very pale, strode into theroom.

　　This man's appearance was at first sight very strange. He staredstraight before him, as though seeing nothing. There was adetermined gleam in his eyes; at the same time there was a deathlypallor in his face, as though he were being led to the scaffold. Hiswhite lips were faintly twitching.

　　He was dressed like a workman and was of medium height, veryyoung, slim, his hair cut in round crop, with thin spare features. Theman whom he had thrust back followed him into the room and succeededin seizing him by the shoulder; he was a warder; but Nikolay pulledhis arm away.

　　Several persons crowded inquisitively into the doorway. Some of themtried to get in. All this took place almost instantaneously.

　　"Go away, it's too soon! Wait till you are sent for!... Why have youbrought him so soon?" Porfiry Petrovitch muttered, extremelyannoyed, and as it were thrown out of his reckoning.

　　But Nikolay suddenly knelt down.

　　"What's the matter?" cried Porfiry, surprised.

　　"I am guilty! Mine is the sin! I am the murderer," Nikolayarticulated suddenly, rather breathless, but speaking fairly loudly.

　　For ten seconds there was silence as though all had been struckdumb; even the warder stepped back, mechanically retreated to thedoor, and stood immovable.

　　"What is it?" cried Porfiry Petrovitch, recovering from hismomentary stupefaction.

　　"I am the murderer," repeated Nikolay, after a brief pause.

　　"What... you... what... whom did you kill?" Porfiry Petrovitch wasobviously bewildered.

　　Nikolay again was silent for a moment.

　　"Alyona Ivanovna and her sister Lizaveta Ivanovna, I... killed...with an axe. Darkness came over me," he added suddenly, and wasagain silent.

　　He still remained on his knees. Porfiry Petrovitch stood for somemoments as though meditating, but suddenly roused himself and wavedback the uninvited spectators. They instantly vanished and closedthe door. Then he looked towards Raskolnikov, who was standing inthe corner, staring wildly at Nikolay, and moved towards him, butstopped short, looked from Nikolay to Raskolnikov and then again atNikolay, and seeming unable to restrain himself darted at the latter.

　　"You're in too great a hurry," he shouted at him, almost angrily. "Ididn't ask you what came over you.... Speak, did you kill them?"

　　"I am the murderer.... I want to give evidence," Nikolay pronounced.

　　"Ach! What did you kill them with?"

　　"An axe. I had it ready."

　　"Ach, he is in a hurry! Alone?"

　　Nikolay did not understand the question.

　　"Did you do it alone?"

　　"Yes, alone. And Mitka is not guilty and had no share in it."

　　"Don't be in a hurry about Mitka! A-ach! How was it you randownstairs like that at the time? The porters met you both!"

　　"It was to put them off the scent... I ran after Mitka," Nikolayreplied hurriedly, as though he had prepared the answer.

　　"I knew it!" cried Porfiry, with vexation. "It's not his own tale heis telling," he muttered as though to himself, and suddenly his eyesrested on Raskolnikov again.

　　He was apparently so taken up with Nikolay that for a moment hehad forgotten Raskolnikov. He was a little taken aback.

　　"My dear Rodion Romanovitch, excuse me!" he flew up to him, "thiswon't do; I'm afraid you must go... it's no good your staying... Iwill...  you see, what a surprise!... Good-bye!"

　　And taking him by the arm, he showed him to the door.

　　"I suppose you didn't expect it?" said Raskolnikov who, though hehad not yet fully grasped the situation, had regained his courage.

　　"You did not expect it either, my friend. See how your hand istrembling! He-he!"

　　"You're trembling, too, Porfiry Petrovitch!"

　　"Yes, I am; I didn't expect it."

　　They were already at the door; Porfiry was impatient for Raskolnikovto be gone.

　　"And your little surprise, aren't you going to show it to me?"Raskolnikov said, sarcastically.

　　"Why, his teeth are chattering as he asks, he-he! You are anironical person! Come, till we meet!"

　　"I believe we can say good-bye!"

　　"That's in God's hands," muttered Porfiry, with an unnatural smile.

　　As he walked through the office, Raskolnikov noticed that manypeople were looking at him. Among them he saw the two porters from thehouse, whom he had invited that night to the police station. Theystood there waiting. But he was no sooner on the stairs than heheard the voice of Porfiry Petrovitch behind him. Turning round, hesaw the latter running after him, out of breath.

　　"One word, Rodion Romanovitch; as to all the rest, it's in God'shands, but as a matter of form there are some questions I shall haveto ask you... so we shall meet again, shan't we?"

　　And Porfiry stood still, facing him with a smile.

　　"Shan't we?" he added again.

　　He seemed to want to say something more, but could not speak out.

　　"You must forgive me, Porfiry Petrovitch, for what has justpassed... I lost my temper," began Raskolnikov, who had so farregained his courage that he felt irresistibly inclined to display hiscoolness.

　　"Don't mention it, don't mention it," Porfiry replied, almostgleefully. "I myself, too... I have a wicked temper, I admit it! Butwe shall meet again. If it's God's will, we may see a great deal ofone another."

　　"And will get to know each other through and through?" addedRaskolnikov.

　　"Yes; know each other through and through," assented PorfiryPetrovitch, and he screwed up his eyes, looking earnestly atRaskolnikov. "Now you're going to a birthday party?"

　　"To a funeral."

　　"Of course, the funeral! Take care of yourself, and get well."

　　"I don't know what to wish you," said Raskolnikov, who had begunto descend the stairs, but looked back again. "I should like to wishyou success, but your office is such a comical one."

　　"Why comical?" Porfiry Petrovitch had turned to go, but he seemed toprick up his ears at this.

　　"Why, how you must have been torturing and harassing that poorNikolay psychologically, after your fashion, till he confessed! Youmust have been at him day and night, proving to him that he was themurderer, and now that he has confessed, you'll begin vivisectinghim again. 'You are lying,' you'll say. 'You are not the murderer! Youcan't be! It's not your own tale you are telling!' You must admit it'sa comical business!"

　　"He-he-he! You noticed then that I said to Nikolay just now thatit was not his own tale he was telling?"

　　"How could I help noticing it!"

　　"He-he! You are quick-witted. You notice everything! You've really aplayful mind! And you always fasten on the comic side... he-he! Theysay that was the marked characteristic of Gogol, among the writers."

　　"Yes, of Gogol."

　　"Yes, of Gogol.... I shall look forward to meeting you."

　　"So shall I."

　　Raskolnikov walked straight home. He was so muddled and bewilderedthat on getting home he sat for a quarter of an hour on the sofa,trying to collect his thoughts. He did not attempt to think aboutNikolay; he was stupefied; he felt that his confession was somethinginexplicable, amazing- something beyond his understanding. ButNikolay's confession was an actual fact. The consequences of this factwere clear to him at once, its falsehood could not fail to bediscovered, and then they would be after him again. Till then, atleast, he was free and must do something for himself, for the dangerwas imminent.

　　But how imminent? His position gradually became clear to him.Remembering, sketchily, the main outlines of his recent scene withPorfiry, he could not help shuddering again with horror. Of course, hedid not yet know all Porfiry's aims, he could not see into all hiscalculations. But he had already partly shown his hand, and no oneknew better than Raskolnikov how terrible Porfiry's "lead" had beenfor him. A little more and he might have given himself awaycompletely, circumstantially. Knowing his nervous temperament and fromthe first glance seeing through him, Porfiry, though playing a boldgame, was bound to win. There's no denying that Raskolnikov hadcompromised himself seriously, but no facts had come to light asyet; there was nothing positive. But was he taking a true view ofthe position? Wasn't he mistaken? What had Porfiry been trying toget at? Had he really some surprise prepared for him? And what was it?Had he really been expecting something or not? How would they haveparted if it had not been for the unexpected appearance of Nikolay?

　　Porfiry had shown almost all his cards- of course, he had riskedsomething in showing them- and if he had really had anything up hissleeve (Raskolnikov reflected), he would have shown that, too. Whatwas that "surprise"? Was it a joke? Had it meant anything? Could ithave concealed anything like a fact, a piece of positive evidence? Hisyesterday's visitor? What had become of him? Where was he to-day? IfPorfiry really had any evidence, it must be connected with him....

　　He sat on the sofa with his elbows on his knees and his facehidden in his hands. He was still shivering nervously. At last hegot up, took his cap, thought a minute, and went to the door.

　　He had a sort of presentiment that for to-day, at least, he mightconsider himself out of danger. He had a sudden sense almost of joy;he wanted to make haste to Katerina Ivanovna's. He would be too latefor the funeral, of course, but he would be in time for the memorialdinner, and there at once he would see Sonia.

　　He stood still, thought a moment, and a suffering smile came for amoment on to his lips.

　　"To-day! To-day," he repeated to himself. "Yes, to-day! So it mustbe...."

　　But as he was about to open the door, it began opening of itself. Hestarted and moved back. The door opened gently and slowly, and theresuddenly appeared a figure- yesterday's visitor from underground.

　　The man stood in the doorway, looked at Raskolnikov withoutspeaking, and took a step forward into the room. He was exactly thesame as yesterday; the same figure, the same dress, but there was agreat change in his face; he looked dejected and sighed deeply. Ifhe had only put his hand up to his cheek and leaned his head on oneside he would have looked exactly like a peasant woman.

　　"What do you want?" asked Raskolnikov, numb with terror. The man wasstill silent, but suddenly he bowed down almost to the ground,touching it with his finger.

　　"What is it?" cried Raskolnikov.

　　"I have sinned," the man articulated softly.

　　"By evil thoughts."

　　They looked at one another.

　　"I was vexed. When you came, perhaps in drink, and bade theporters go to the police station and asked about the blood, I wasvexed that they let you go and took you for drunken. I was so vexedthat I lost my sleep. And remembering the address we came hereyesterday and asked for you...."

　　"Who came?" Raskolnikov interrupted, instantly beginning torecollect.

　　"I did, I've wronged you."

　　"Then you came from that house?"

　　"I was standing at the gate with them... don't you remember? We havecarried on our trade in that house for years past. We cure and preparehides, we take work home... most of all I was vexed...."

　　And the whole scene of the day before yesterday in the gatewaycame clearly before Raskolnikov's mind; he recollected that therehad been several people there besides the porters, women among them.He remembered one voice had suggested taking him straight to thepolice station. He could not recall the face of the speaker, andeven now he did not recognise it, but he remembered that he had turnedround and made him some answer....

　　So this was the solution of yesterday's horror. The most awfulthought was that he had been actually almost lost, had almost done forhimself on account of such a trivial circumstance. So this man couldtell nothing except his asking about the flat and the blood stains. SoPorfiry, too, had nothing but that delirium, no facts but thispsychology which cuts both ways, nothing positive. So if no more factscome to light (and they must not, they must not!) then... then whatcan they do to him? How can they convict him, even if they arrest him?And Porfiry then had only just heard about the flat and had notknown about it before.

　　"Was it you who told Porfiry... that I'd been there?" he cried,struck by a sudden idea.

　　"What Porfiry?"

　　"The head of the detective department?"

　　"Yes. The porters did not go there, but I went."

　　"To-day?"

　　"I got there two minutes before you. And I heard, I heard it all,how he worried you."

　　"Where? What? When?"

　　"Why, in the next room. I was sitting there all the time."

　　PART FIVE

　　Chapter One

　　THE MORNING that followed the fateful interview with Dounia andher mother brought sobering influences to bear on Pyotr Petrovitch.Intensely unpleasant as it was, he was forced little by little toaccept as a fact beyond recall what had seemed to him only the daybefore fantastic and incredible. The black snake of wounded vanity hadbeen gnawing at his heart all night. When he got out of bed, PyotrPetrovitch immediately looked in the looking-glass. He was afraid thathe had jaundice. However his health seemed unimpaired so far, andlooking at his noble, clear-skinned countenance which had grownfattish of late, Pyotr Petrovitch for an instant was positivelycomforted in the conviction that he would find another bride and,perhaps, even a better one. But coming back to the sense of hispresent position, he turned aside and spat vigorously, which excited asarcastic smile in Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, the young friendwith whom he was staying. That smile Pyotr Petrovitch noticed, andat once set it down against his young friend's account. He had setdown a good many points against him of late. His anger was redoubledwhen he reflected that he ought not to have told Andrey Semyonovitchabout the result of yesterday's interview. That was the second mistakehe had made in temper, through impulsiveness and irritability....Moreover, all that morning one unpleasantness followed another. Heeven found a hitch awaiting him in his legal case in the Senate. Hewas particularly irritated by the owner of the flat which had beentaken in view of his approaching marriage and was being redecorated athis own expense; the owner, a rich German tradesman, would notentertain the idea of breaking the contract which had just been signedand insisted on the full forfeit money, though Pyotr Petrovitchwould be giving him back the flat practically redecorated. In the sameway the upholsterers refused to return a single rouble of theinstalment paid for the furniture purchased but not yet removed to theflat.

　　"Am I to get married simply for the sake of the furniture?" PyotrPetrovitch ground his teeth and at the same time once more he had agleam of desperate hope. "Can all that be really so irrevocablyover? Is it no use to make another effort?" The thought of Dounia senta voluptuous pang through his heart. He endured anguish at thatmoment, and if it had been possible to slay Raskolnikov instantly bywishing it, Pyotr Petrovitch would promptly have uttered the wish.

　　"It was my mistake, too, not to have given them money," hethought, as he returned dejectedly to Lebeziatnikov's room, "and whyon earth was I such a Jew? It was false economy! I meant to keepthem without a penny so that they should turn to me as theirprovidence, and look at them! Foo! If I'd spent some fifteen hundredroubles on them for the trousseau and presents, on knick-knacks,dressing-cases, jewellery, materials, and all that sort of trashfrom Knopp's and the English shop, my position would have beenbetter and... stronger! They could not have refused me so easily! Theyare the sort of people that would feel bound to return money andpresents if they broke it off; and they would find it hard to do it!And their consciences would prick them: how can we dismiss a man whohas hitherto been so generous and delicate?.... H'm! I've made ablunder."

　　And grinding his teeth again, Pyotr Petrovitch called himself afool- but not aloud, of course.

　　He returned home, twice as irritated and angry as before. Thepreparations for the funeral dinner at Katerina Ivanovna's excited hiscuriosity as he passed. He had heard about it the day before; hefancied, indeed, that he had been invited, but absorbed in his owncares he had paid no attention. Inquiring of Madame Lippevechsel whowas busy laying the table while Katerina Ivanovna was away at thecemetery, he heard that the entertainment was to be a great affair,that all the lodgers had been invited, among them some who had notknown the dead man, that even Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov wasinvited in spite of his previous quarrel with Katerina Ivanovna,that he, Pyotr Petrovitch, was not only invited, but was eagerlyexpected as he was the most important of the lodgers. AmaliaIvanovna herself had been invited with great ceremony in spite ofthe recent unpleasantness, and so she was very busy withpreparations and was taking a positive pleasure in them; she wasmoreover dressed up to the nines, all in new black silk, and she wasproud of it. All this suggested an idea to Pyotr Petrovitch and hewent into his room, or rather Lebeziatnikov's, somewhat thoughtful. Hehad learnt that Raskolnikov was to be one of the guests.

　　Andrey Semyonovitch had been at home all the morning. The attitudeof Pyotr Petrovitch to this gentleman was strange, though perhapsnatural. Pyotr Petrovitch had despised and hated him from the day hecame to stay with him and at the same time he seemed somewhat afraidof him. He had not come to stay with him on his arrival inPetersburg simply from parsimony, though that had been perhaps hischief object. He had heard of Andrey Semyonovitch, who had once beenhis ward, as a leading young progressive who was taking an importantpart in certain interesting circles, the doings of which were a legendin the provinces. It had impressed Pyotr Petrovitch. These powerfulomniscient circles who despised every one and showed every one uphad long inspired in him a peculiar but quite vague alarm. He had not,of course, been able to form even an approximate notion of what theymeant. He, like every one, had heard that there were, especially inPetersburg, progressives of some sort, nihilists and so on, and,like many people, he exaggerated and distorted the significance ofthose words to an absurd degree. What for many years past he hadfeared more than anything was being shown up and this was the chiefground for his continual uneasiness at the thought of transferring hisbusiness to Petersburg. He was afraid of this as little children aresometimes panic-stricken. Some years before, when he was just enteringon his own career, he had come upon two cases in which ratherimportant personages in the province, patrons of his, had been cruellyshown up. One instance had ended in great scandal for the personattacked and the other had very nearly ended in serious trouble. Forthis reason Pyotr Petrovitch intended to go into the subject as soonas he reached Petersburg and, if necessary, to anticipatecontingencies by seeking the favour of "our younger generation." Herelied on Andrey Semyonovitch for this and before his visit toRaskolnikov he had succeeded in picking up some current phrases. Hesoon discovered that Andrey Semyonovitch was a commonplacesimpleton, but that by no means reassured Pyotr Petrovitch. Even if hehad been certain that all the progressives were fools like him, itwould not have allayed his uneasiness. All the doctrines, the ideas,the systems with which Andrey Semyonovitch pestered him had nointerest for him. He had his own object- he simply wanted to findout at once what was happening here. Had these people any power ornot? Had he anything to fear from them? Would they expose anyenterprise of his? And what precisely was now the object of theirattacks? Could he somehow make up to them and get round them if theyreally were powerful? Was this the thing to do or not? Couldn't hegain something through them? In fact hundreds of questions presentedthemselves.

　　Andrey Semyonovitch was an anaemic, scrofulous little man, withstrangely flaxen mutton-chop whiskers of which he was very proud. Hewas a clerk and had almost always something wrong with his eyes. Hewas rather soft-hearted, but self-confident and sometimes extremelyconceited in speech which had an absurd effect, incongruous with hislittle figure. He was one of the lodgers most respected by AmaliaIvanovna, for he did not get drunk and paid regularly for hislodgings. Andrey Semyonovitch really was rather stupid; he attachedhimself to the cause of progress and "our younger generation" fromenthusiasm. He was one of the numerous and varied legion ofdullards, of half-animate abortions, conceited, half-educatedcoxcombs, who attach themselves to the idea most in fashion only tovulgarise it and who caricature every cause they serve, howeversincerely.

　　Though Lebeziatnikov was so good-natured, he, too, was beginningto dislike Pyotr Petrovitch. This happened on both sidesunconsciously. However simple Andrey Semyonovitch might be, he beganto see that Pyotr Petrovitch was duping him and secretly despisinghim, and that "he was not the right sort of man." He had triedexpounding to him the system of Fourier and the Darwinian theory,but of late Pyotr Petrovitch began to listen too sarcastically andeven to be rude. The fact was he had begun instinctively to guess thatLebeziatnikov was not merely a commonplace simpleton, but, perhaps,a liar, too, and that he had no connections of any consequence even inhis own circle, but had simply picked things up third-hand; and thatvery likely he did not even know much about his own work ofpropaganda, for he was in too great a muddle. A fine person he wouldbe to show any one up! It must be noted, by the way, that PyotrPetrovitch had during those ten days eagerly accepted the strangestpraise from Andrey Semyonovitch; he had not protested, for instance,when Andrey Semyonovitch belauded him for being ready to contribute tothe establishment of the new "commune," or to abstain from christeninghis future children, or to acquiesce if Dounia were to take a lovera month after marriage, and so on. Pyotr Petrovitch so enjoyed hearinghis own praises that he did not disdain even such virtues when theywere attributed to him.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch had had occasion that morning to realise somefive per cent. bonds and now he sat down to the table and counted overbundles of notes. Andrey Semyonovitch who hardly ever had any moneywalked about the room pretending to himself to look at all thosebank notes with indifference and even contempt. Nothing would haveconvinced Pyotr Petrovitch that Andrey Semyonovitch could reallylook on the money unmoved, and the latter, on his side, keptthinking bitterly that Pyotr Petrovitch was capable of entertainingsuch an idea about him and was, perhaps, glad of the opportunity ofteasing his young friend by reminding him of his inferiority and thegreat difference between them.

　　He found him incredibly inattentive and irritable, though he, AndreySemyonovitch, began enlarging on his favourite subject, the foundationof a new special "commune." The brief remarks that dropped fromPyotr Petrovitch between the clicking of the beads on the reckoningframe betrayed unmistakable and discourteous irony. But the "humane"Andrey Semyonovitch ascribed Pyotr Petrovitch's ill-humour to hisrecent breach with Dounia and he was burning with impatience todiscourse on that theme. He had something progressive to say on thesubject which might console his worthy friend and "could not fail"to promote his development.

　　"There is some sort of festivity being prepared at that... at thewidow's, isn't there?" Pyotr Petrovitch asked suddenly, interruptingAndrey Semyonovitch at the most interesting passage.

　　"Why, don't you know? Why, I was telling you last night what I thinkabout all such ceremonies. And she invited you too, I heard. Youwere talking to her yesterday..."

　　"I should never have expected that beggarly fool would have spent onthis feast all the money she got from that other fool, Raskolnikov.I was surprised just now as I came through at the preparationsthere, the wines! Several people are invited. It's beyond everything!"continued Pyotr Petrovitch, who seemed to have some object in pursuingthe conversation. "What? You say I am asked too? When was that? Idon't remember. But I shan't go. Why should I? I only said a word toher in passing yesterday of the possibility of her obtaining ayear's salary as a destitute widow of a government clerk. I supposeshe has invited me on that account, hasn't she? He-he-he!"

　　"I don't intend to go either," said Lebeziatnikov.

　　"I should think not, after giving her a thrashing! You might wellhesitate, he-he!"

　　"Who thrashed? Whom?" cried Lebeziatnikov, flustered and blushing.

　　"Why, you thrashed Katerina Ivanovna a month ago. I heard soyesterday... so that's what your convictions amount to... and thewoman question, too, wasn't quite sound, he-he-he!" and PyotrPetrovitch, as though comforted, went back to clicking his beads.

　　"It's all slander and nonsense!" cried Lebeziatnikov, who was alwaysafraid of allusions to the subject. "It was not like that at all, itwas quite different. You've heard it wrong; it's a libel. I was simplydefending myself. She rushed at me first with her nails, she pulledout all my whiskers.... It's permissable for any one I should hopeto defend himself and I never allow any one to use violence to me onprinciple, for it's an act of despotism. What was I to do? I simplypushed her back."

　　"He-he-he!" Luzhin went on laughing maliciously.

　　"You keep on like that because you are out of humour yourself....But that's nonsense and it has nothing, nothing whatever to do withthe woman question! You don't understand; I used to think, indeed,that if women are equal to men in all respects even in strength (as ismaintained now) there ought to be equality in that, too. Of course,I reflected afterwards that such a question ought not really to arise,for there ought not to be fighting and in the future society, fightingis unthinkable... and that it would be a queer thing to seek forequality in fighting. I am not so stupid... though, of course, thereis fighting... there won't be later, but at present there is...confound it! How muddled one gets with you! It's not on that accountthat I am not going. I am not going on principle, not to take partin the revolting convention of memorial dinners, that's why! Though,of course, one might go to laugh at it.... I am sorry there won't beany priests at it. I should certainly go if there were."

　　"Then you would sit down at another man's table and insult it andthose who invited you. Eh?"

　　"Certainly not insult, but protest. I should do it with a goodobject. I might indirectly assist the cause of enlightenment andpropaganda. It's a duty of every man to work for enlightenment andpropaganda and the more harshly, perhaps, the better. I might drop aseed, an idea.... And something might grow up from that seed. Howshould I be insulting them? They might be offended at first, butafterwards they'd see I'd done them a service. You know, Terebyeva(who is in the community now) was blamed because when she left herfamily and... devoted... herself, she wrote to her father and motherthat she wouldn't go on living conventionally and was entering on afree marriage and it was said that that was too harsh, that shemight have spared them and have written more kindly. I think that'sall nonsense and there's no need of softness, on the contrary,what's wanted is protest. Varents had been married seven years, sheabandoned her two children, she told her husband straight out in aletter: 'I have realised that I cannot be happy with you. I cannever forgive you that you have deceived me by concealing from me thatthere is another organisation of society by means of thecommunities. I have only lately learned it from a great-hearted man towhom I have given myself and with whom I am establishing acommunity. I speak plainly because I consider it dishonest todeceive you. Do as you think best. Do not hope to get me back, you aretoo late. I hope you will be happy.' That's how letters like thatought to be written!"

　　"Is that Terebyeva the one you said had made a third free marriage?"

　　"No, it's only the second, really! But what if it were the fourth,what if it were the fifteenth, that's all nonsense! And if ever Iregretted the death of my father and mother, it is now, and Isometimes think if my parents were living what a protest I wouldhave aimed at them! I would have done something on purpose... Iwould have shown them! I would have astonished them! I am really sorrythere is no one!"

　　"To surprise! He-he! Well, be that as you will," Pyotr Petrovitchinterrupted, "but tell me this; do you know the dead man's daughter,the delicate-looking little thing? It's true what they say abouther, isn't it?"

　　"What of it? I think, that is, it is my own personal conviction,that this is the normal condition of women. Why not? I mean,distinguons. In our present society, it is not altogether normal,because it is compulsory, but in the future society, it will beperfectly normal, because it will be voluntary. Even as it is, she wasquite right: she was suffering and that was her asset, so to speak,her capital which she had a perfect right to dispose of. Of course, inthe future society, there will be no need of assets, but her part willhave another significance, rational and in harmony with herenvironment. As to Sofya Semyonovna personally, I regard her action asa vigorous protest against the organization of society, and Irespect her deeply for it; I rejoice indeed when I look at her!"

　　"I was told that you got her turned out of these lodgings."

　　Lebeziatnikov was enraged.

　　"That's another slander," he yelled. "It was not so at all! That wasall Katerina Ivanovna's invention, for she did not understand! And Inever made love to Sofya Semyonovna! I was simply developing her,entirely disinterestedly, trying to rouse her to protest.... All Iwanted was her protest and Sofya Semyonovna could not have remainedhere anyway!"

　　"Have you asked her to join your community?"

　　"You keep on laughing and very inappropriately, allow me to tellyou. You don't understand! There is no such role in a community. Thecommunity is established that there should be no such roles. In acommunity, such a role is essentially transformed and what is stupidhere is sensible there, what, under present conditions, is unnaturalbecomes perfectly natural in the community. It all depends on theenvironment. It's all the environment and man himself is nothing.And I am on good terms with Sofya Semyonovna to this day, which is aproof that she never regarded me as having wronged her. I am tryingnow to attract her to the community, but on quite, quite a differentfooting. What are you laughing at? We are trying to establish acommunity of our own, a special one, on a broader basis. We havegone further in our convictions. We reject more! And meanwhile I'mstill developing Sofya Semyonovna. She has a beautiful, beautifulcharacter!"

　　"And you take advantage of her fine character, eh? He-he!"

　　"No, no! Oh, no! On the contrary."

　　"Oh, on the contrary! He-he-he! A queer thing to say!"

　　"Believe me! Why should I disguise it? In fact, I feel it strangemyself how timid, chaste and modern she is with me!"

　　"And you, of course, are developing her... he-he! trying to prove toher that all that modesty is nonsense?"

　　"Not at all, not at all! How coarsely, how stupidly- excuse mesaying so- you misunderstand the word development! Good heavens,how... crude you still are! We are striving for the freedom of womenand you have only one idea in your head.... Setting aside thegeneral question of chastity and feminine modesty as useless inthemselves and indeed prejudices, I fully accept her chastity with me,because that's for her to decide. Of course if she were to tell meherself that she wanted me, I should think myself very lucky,because I like the girl very much; but as it is, no one has evertreated her more courteously than I, with more respect for herdignity... I wait in hopes, that's all!"

　　"You had much better make her a present of something. I bet younever thought of that."

　　"You don't understand, as I've told you already! Of course, she isin such a position, but it's another question. Quite another question!You simply despise her. Seeing a fact which you mistakenly considerdeserving of contempt, you refuse to take a humane view of a fellowcreature. You don't know what a character she is! I am only sorry thatof late she has quite given up reading and borrowing books. I usedto lend them to her. I am sorry, too, that with all the energy andresolution in protesting- which she has already shown once- she haslittle self-reliance, little, so to say, independence, so as tobreak free from certain prejudices and certain foolish ideas. Yetshe thoroughly understands some questions, for instance aboutkissing of hands, that is, that it's an insult to a woman for a man tokiss her hand, because it's a sign of inequality. We had a debateabout it and I described it to her. She listened attentively to anaccount of the workmen's associations in France, too. Now I amexplaining the question of coming into the room in the futuresociety."

　　"And what's that, pray?"

　　"We had a debate lately on the question: Has a member of thecommunity the right to enter another member's room, whether man orwoman at any time... and we decided that he has!"

　　"It might be at an inconvenient moment, he-he!"

　　Lebeziatnikov was really angry.

　　"You are always thinking of something unpleasant," he cried withaversion. "Tfoo! How vexed I am that when I was expounding our system,I referred prematurely to the question of personal privacy! It'salways a stumbling-block to people like you, they turn into ridiculebefore they understand it. And how proud they are of it, too! Tfoo!I've often maintained that that question should not be approached by anovice till he has a firm faith in the system. And tell me, please,what do you find so shameful even in cesspools? I should be thefirst to be ready to clean out any cesspool you like. And it's not aquestion of self-sacrifice, it's simply work, honourable, usefulwork which is as good as any other and much better than the work ofa Raphael and a Pushkin, because it is more useful."

　　"And more honourable, more honourable, he-he-he!"

　　"What do you mean by 'more honourable'? I don't understand suchexpressions to describe human activity. 'More honourable,' 'nobler'-all those are old-fashioned prejudices which I reject. Everythingwhich is of use to mankind is honourable. I only understand oneword: useful! You can snigger as much as you like, but that's so!"

　　Pyotr Petrovitch laughed heartily. He had finished counting themoney and was putting it away. But some of the notes he left on thetable. The "cesspool question" had already been a subject of disputebetween them. What was absurd was that it made Lebeziatnikov reallyangry, while it amused Luzhin and at that moment he particularlywanted to anger his young friend.

　　"It's your ill-luck yesterday that makes you so ill-humoured andannoying," blurted out Lebeziatnikov, who in spite of his"independence" and his "protests" did not venture to oppose PyotrPetrovitch and still behaved to him with some of the respecthabitual in earlier years.

　　"You'd better tell me this," Pyotr Petrovitch interrupted withhaughty displeasure, "can you... or rather are you really friendlyenough with that young person to ask her to step in here for a minute?I think they've all come back from the cemetery... I hear the sound ofsteps... I want to see her, that young person."

　　"What for?" Lebeziatnikov asked with surprise.

　　"Oh, I want to. I am leaving here to-day or to-morrow andtherefore I wanted to speak to her about... However, you may bepresent during the interview. It's better you should be, indeed. Forthere's no knowing what you might imagine."

　　"I shan't imagine anything. I only asked and, if you've anythingto say to her, nothing is easier than to call her in. I'll go directlyand you may be sure I won't be in your way."

　　Five minutes later Lebeziatnikov came in with Sonia. She came invery much surprised and overcome with shyness as usual. She was alwaysshy in such circumstances and was always afraid of new people, she hadbeen as a child and was even more so now.... Pyotr Petrovitch mether "politely and affably," but with a certain shade of banteringfamiliarity which in his opinion was suitable for a man of hisrespectability and weight in dealing with a creature so young and sointeresting as she. He hastened to "reassure" her and made her sitdown facing him at the table. Sonia sat down, looked about her- atLebeziatnikov, at the notes lying on the table and then again at PyotrPetrovitch and her eyes remained riveted on him. Lebeziatnikov wasmoving to the door. Pyotr Petrovitch signed to Sonia to remainseated and stopped Lebeziatnikov.

　　"Is Raskolnikov in there? Has he come?" he asked him in a whisper.

　　"Raskolnikov? Yes. Why? Yes, he is there. I saw him just come in....Why?"

　　"Well, I particularly beg you to remain here with us and not toleave me alone with this... young woman. I only want a few wordswith her, but God knows what they may make of it. I shouldn't likeRaskolnikov to repeat anything.... You understand what I mean?"

　　"I understand!" Lebeziatnikov saw the point. "Yes, you are right....Of course, I am convinced personally that you have no reason to beuneasy, but... still, you are right. Certainly I'll stay. I'll standhere at the window and not be in your way...  I think you areright..."

　　Pyotr Petrovitch returned to the sofa, sat down opposite Sonia,looked attentively at her and assumed an extremely dignified, evensevere expression, as much as to say, "don't you make any mistake,madam." Sonia was overwhelmed with embarrassment.

　　"In the first place, Sofya Semyonovna, will you make my excuses toyour respected mamma.... That's right, isn't it? Katerina Ivanovnastands in the place of a mother to you?" Pyotr Petrovitch began withgreat dignity, though affably.

　　It was evident that his intentions were friendly.

　　"Quite so, yes; the place of a mother," Sonia answered, timidlyand hurriedly.

　　"Then will you make my apologies to her? Through inevitablecircumstances I am forced to be absent and shall not be at thedinner in spite of your mamma's kind invitation."

　　"Yes... I'll tell her... at once."

　　And Sonia hastily jumped up from her seat.

　　"Wait, that's not all," Pyotr Petrovitch detained her, smiling ather simplicity and ignorance of good manners, "and you know me little,my dear Sofya Semyonovna, if you suppose I would have ventured totrouble a person like you for a matter of so little consequenceaffecting myself only. I have another object."

　　Sonia sat down hurriedly. Her eyes rested again for an instant onthe grey and rainbow-coloured notes that remained on the table, butshe quickly looked away and fixed her eyes on Pyotr Petrovitch. Shefelt it horribly indecorous, especially for her, to look at anotherperson's money. She stared at the gold eyeglass which Pyotr Petrovitchheld in his left hand and at the massive and extremely handsome ringwith a yellow stone on his middle finger. But suddenly she looked awayand, not knowing where to turn, ended by staring Pyotr Petrovitchagain straight in the face. After a pause of still greater dignityhe continued.

　　"I chanced yesterday in passing to exchange a couple of words withKaterina Ivanovna, poor woman. That was sufficient to enable me toascertain that she is in a position- preternatural, if one may soexpress it."

　　"Yes... preternatural..." Sonia hurriedly assented.

　　"Or it would be simpler and more comprehensible to say, ill."

　　"Yes, simpler and more comprehen... yes, ill."

　　"Quite so. So then from a feeling of humanity and so to speakcompassion, I should be glad to be of service to her in any way,foreseeing her unfortunate position. I believe the whole of thispoverty-stricken family depends now entirely on you?"

　　"Allow me to ask," Sonia rose to her feet, "did you say something toher yesterday of the possibility of a pension? Because she told me youhad undertaken to get her one. Was that true?"

　　"Not in the slightest, and indeed it's an absurdity! I merely hintedat her obtaining temporary assistance as the widow of an officialwho had died in the service- if only she has patronage... butapparently your late parent had not served his full term and had notindeed been in the service at all of late. In fact, if there couldbe any hope, it would be very ephemeral, because there would be noclaim for assistance in that case, far from it.... And she is dreamingof a pension already, he-he-he!... A go-ahead lady!"

　　"Yes, she is. For she is credulous and good-hearted, and shebelieves everything from the goodness of her heart and... and... andshe is like that... yes... You must excuse her," said Sonia, and againshe got up to go.

　　"But you haven't heard what I have to say."

　　"No, I haven't heard," muttered Sonia.

　　"Then sit down." She was terribly confused; she sat down again athird time.

　　"Seeing her position with her unfortunate little ones, I should beglad, as I have said before, so far as lies in my power, to be ofservice, that is, so far as is in my power, not more. One might forinstance get up a subscription for her, or a lottery, something of thesort, such as is always arranged in such cases by friends or evenoutsiders desirous of assisting people. It was of that I intended tospeak to you; it might be done."

　　"Yes, yes... God will repay you for it," faltered Sonia, gazingintently at Pyotr Petrovitch.

　　"It might be, but we will talk of it later. We might begin itto-day, we will talk it over this evening and lay the foundation so tospeak. Come to me at seven o'clock. Mr. Lebeziatnikov, I hope, willassist us. But there is one circumstance of which I ought to warnyou beforehand and for which I venture to trouble you, SofyaSemyonovna, to come here. In my opinion money cannot be, indeed it'sunsafe to put it into Katerina Ivanovna's own hands. The dinner to-dayis a proof of that. Though she has not, so to speak, a crust ofbread for to-morrow and... well, boots or shoes, or anything; shehas bought to-day Jamaica rum, and even, I believe, Madeira and... andcoffee. I saw it as I passed through. To-morrow it will all fallupon you again, they won't have a crust of bread. It's absurd, really,and so, to my thinking, a subscription ought to be raised so thatthe unhappy widow should not know of the money, but only you, forinstance. Am I right?"

　　"I don't know... this is only to-day, once in her life.... She wasso anxious to do honour, to celebrate the memory.... And she is verysensible... but just as you think and I shall be very, very... theywill all be... and God will reward... and the orphans..."

　　Sonia burst into tears.

　　"Very well, then, keep it in mind; and now will you accept for thebenefit of your relation the small sum that I am able to spare, fromme personally. I am very anxious that my name should not bementioned in connection with it. Here... having so to speakanxieties of my own, I cannot do more..."

　　And Pyotr Petrovitch held out to Sonia a ten-rouble note carefullyunfolded. Sonia took it, flushed crimson, jumped up, mutteredsomething and began taking leave. Pyotr Petrovitch accompanied herceremoniously to the door. She got out of the room at last, agitatedand distressed, and returned to Katerina Ivanovna, overwhelmed withconfusion.

　　All this time Lebeziatnikov had stood at the window or walkedabout the room, anxious not to interrupt the conversation; whenSonia had gone he walked up to Pyotr Petrovitch and solemnly heldout his hand.

　　"I heard and saw everything," he said, laying stress on the lastverb. "That is honourable, I mean to say, it's humane! You wanted toavoid gratitude, I saw! And although I cannot, I confess, in principlesympathise with private charity, for it not only fails to eradicatethe evil but even promotes it, yet I must admit that I saw your actionwith pleasure- yes, yes, I like it."

　　"That's all nonsense," muttered Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhatdisconcerted, looking carefully at Lebeziatnikov.

　　"No, it's not nonsense! A man who has suffered distress andannoyance as you did yesterday and who yet can sympathise with themisery of others, such a man... even though he is making a socialmistake- is still deserving of respect! I did not expect it indeedof you, Pyotr Petrovitch, especially as according to your ideas... oh,what a drawback your ideas are to you! How distressed you are forinstance by your ill luck yesterday," cried the simple-heartedLebeziatnikov, who felt a return of affection for Pyotr Petrovitch."And, what do you want with marriage, with legal marriage, my dear,noble Pyotr Petrovitch? Why do you cling to this legality of marriage?Well, you may beat me if you like, but I am glad, positively glad ithasn't come off, that you are free, that you are not quite lost forhumanity.... you see, I've spoken my mind!"

　　"Because I don't want in your free marriage to be made a fool of andto bring up another man's children, that's why I want legal marriage,"Luzhin replied in order to make some answer.

　　He seemed preoccupied by something.

　　"Children? You referred to children," Lebeziatnikov started off likea warhorse at the trumpet call. "Children are a social question anda question of first importance, I agree; but the question ofchildren has another solution. Some refuse to have childrenaltogether, because they suggest the institution of the family.We'll speak of children later, but now as to the question of honour, Iconfess that's my weak point. That horrid, military, Pushkinexpression is unthinkable in the dictionary of the future. What doesit mean indeed? It's nonsense, there will be no deception in a freemarriage! That is only the natural consequence of a legal marriage, soto say, its corrective, a protest. So that indeed it's nothumiliating... and if I ever, to suppose an absurdity, were to belegally married, I should be positively glad of it. I should say to mywife: 'My dear, hitherto I have loved you, now I respect you, foryou've shown you can protest!' You laugh! That's because you are ofincapable of getting away from prejudices. Confound it all! Iunderstand now where the unpleasantness is of being deceived in alegal marriage, but it's simply a despicable consequence of adespicable position in which both are humiliated. When the deceptionis open, as in a free marriage, then it does not exist, it'sunthinkable. Your wife will only prove how she respects you byconsidering you incapable of opposing her happiness and avengingyourself on her for her new husband. Damn it all! I sometimes dream ifI were to be married, foo! I mean if I were to marry, legally ornot, it's just the same, I should present my wife with a lover ifshe had not found one for herself. 'My dear,' I should say, 'I loveyou, but even more than that I desire you to respect me. See!' Am Inot right?"

　　Pyotr Petrovitch sniggered as he listened, but without muchmerriment. He hardly heard it indeed. He was preoccupied withsomething else and even Lebeziatnikov at last noticed it. PyotrPetrovitch seemed excited and rubbed his hands. Lebeziatnikovremembered all this and reflected upon it afterwards.

　　Chapter Two

　　IT WOULD be difficult to explain exactly what could haveoriginated the idea of that senseless dinner in Katerina Ivanovna'sdisordered brain. Nearly ten of the twenty roubles, given byRaskolnikov for Marmeladov's funeral, were wasted upon it. PossiblyKaterina Ivanovna felt obliged to honour the memory of the deceased"suitably," that all the lodgers, and still more Amalia Ivanovna,might know "that he was in no way their inferior, and perhaps verymuch their superior," and that no one had the right "to turn up hisnose at him." Perhaps the chief element was that peculiar "poorman's pride," which compels many poor people to spend their lastsavings on some traditional social ceremony, simply in order to do"like other people," and not to "be looked down upon." It is veryprobable, too, that Katerina Ivanovna longed on this occasion, atthe moment when she seemed to be abandoned by every one, to show those"wretched contemptible lodgers" that she knew "how to do things, howto entertain" and that she had been brought up "in a genteel, shemight almost say aristocratic colonel's family" and had not been meantfor sweeping floors and washing the children's rags at night. Even thepoorest and most broken-spirited people are sometimes liable tothese paroxysms of pride and vanity which take the form of anirresistible nervous craving. And Katerina Ivanovna was notbroken-spirited; she might have been killed by circumstance, but herspirit could not have been broken, that is, she could not have beenintimidated, her will could not be crushed. Moreover Sonia had saidwith good reason that her mind was unhinged. She could not be saidto be insane, but for a year past she had been so harassed that hermind might well be overstrained. The later stages of consumption areapt, doctors tell us, to affect the intellect.

　　There was no great variety of wines, nor was there Madeira; but winethere was. There was vodka, rum and Lisbon wine, all of the poorestquality but in sufficient quantity. Besides the traditional rice andhoney, there were three or four dishes, one of which consisted ofpancakes, all prepared in Amalia Ivanovna's kitchen. Two samovars wereboiling, that tea and punch might be offered after dinner. KaterinaIvanovna had herself seen to purchasing the provisions, with thehelp of one of the lodgers, an unfortunate little Pole who had somehowbeen stranded at Madame Lippevechsel's. He promptly put himself atKaterina Ivanovna's disposal and had been all that morning and all theday before running about as fast as his legs could carry him, and veryanxious that every one should be aware of it. For every trifle heran to Katerina Ivanovna, even hunting her out at the bazaar, at everyinstant called her "Pani." She was heartily sick of him before theend, though she had declared at first that she could not have got onwithout this "serviceable and magnanimous man." It was one of KaterinaIvanovna's characteristics to paint every one she met in the mostglowing colours. Her praises were so exaggerated as sometimes to beembarrassing; she would invent various circumstances to the creditof her new acquaintance and quite genuinely believe in theirreality. Then all of a sudden she would be disillusioned and wouldrudely and contemptuously repulse the person she had only a fewhours before been literally adoring. She was naturally of a gay,lively and peace-loving disposition, but from continual failures andmisfortunes she had come to desire so keenly that all should live inpeace and joy and should not dare to break the peace, that theslightest jar, the smallest disaster reduced her almost to frenzy, andshe would pass in an instant from the brightest hopes and fancies tocursing her fate and raving, and knocking her head against the wall.

　　Amalia Ivanovna, too, suddenly acquired extraordinary importancein Katerina Ivanovna's eyes and was treated by her withextraordinary respect, probably only because Amalia Ivanovna hadthrown herself heart and soul into the preparations. She hadundertaken to lay the table, to provide the linen, crockery, &c.,and to cook the dishes in her kitchen, and Katerina Ivanovna hadleft it all in her hands and gone herself to the cemetery.Everything had been well done. Even the tablecloth was nearly clean;the crockery, knives, forks and glasses were, of course, of all shapesand patterns, lent by different lodgers, but the table was properlylaid at the time fixed, and Amalia Ivanovna, feeling she had doneher work well, had put on a black silk dress and a cap with newmourning ribbons and met the returning party with some pride. Thispride, though justifiable, displeased Katerina Ivanovna for somereason: "as though the table could not have been laid except by AmaliaIvanovna!" She disliked the cap with new ribbons, too. "Could she bestuck up, the stupid German, because she was mistress of the house,and had consented as a favour to help her poor lodgers! As a favour!Fancy that! Katerina Ivanovna's father who had been a colonel andalmost a governor had sometimes had the table set for forty persons,and then any one like Amalia Ivanovna, or rather Ludwigovna, would nothave been allowed into the kitchen."

　　Katerina Ivanovna, however, put off expressing her feelings forthe time and contented herself with treating her coldly, though shedecided inwardly that she would certainly have to put AmaliaIvanovna down and set her in her proper place, for goodness onlyknew what she was fancying herself. Katerina Ivanovna was irritatedtoo by the fact that hardly any of the lodgers invited had come to thefuneral, except the Pole who had just managed to run into thecemetery, while to the memorial dinner the poorest and mostinsignificant of them had turned up, the wretched creatures, many ofthem not quite sober. The older and more respectable of them all, asif by common consent, stayed away. Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, forinstance, who might be said to be the most respectable of all thelodgers, did not appear, though Katerina Ivanovna had the eveningbefore told all the world, that is Amalia Ivanovna, Polenka, Sonia andthe Pole, that he was the most generous, noble-hearted man with alarge property and vast connections, who had been a friend of herfirst husband's, and a guest in her father's house, and that he hadpromised to use all his influence to secure her a considerablepension. It must be noted that when Katerina Ivanovna exalted anyone's connections and fortune, it was without any ulterior motive,quite disinterestedly, for the mere pleasure of adding to theconsequence of the person praised. Probably "taking his cue" fromLuzhin, "that contemptible wretch Lebeziatnikov had not turned upeither. What did he fancy himself? He was only asked out of kindnessand because he was sharing the same room with Pyotr Petrovitch and wasa friend of his, so that it would have been awkward not to invitehim."

　　Among those who failed to appear were "the genteel lady and herold-maidish daughter," who had only been lodgers in the house forthe last fortnight, but had several times complained of the noiseand uproar in Katerina Ivanovna's room, especially when Marmeladov hadcome back drunk. Katerina Ivanovna heard this from Amalia Ivanovnawho, quarrelling with Katerina Ivanovna, and threatening to turn thewhole family out of doors, had shouted at her that they "were notworth the foot" of the honourable lodgers whom they were disturbing.Katerina Ivanovna determined now to invite this lady and her daughter,"whose foot she was not worth," and who had turned away haughtily whenshe casually met them, so that they might know that "she was morenoble in her thoughts and feelings and did not harbour malice," andmight see that she was not accustomed to her way of living. She hadproposed to make this clear to them at dinner with allusions to herlate father's governorship, and also at the same time to hint thatit was exceedingly stupid of them to turn away on meeting her. The fatcolonel-major (he was really a discharged officer of low rank) wasalso absent, but it appeared that he had been "not himself" for thelast two days. The party consisted of the Pole, a wretched lookingclerk with a spotty face and a greasy coat, who had not a word tosay for himself, and smelt abominably, a deaf and almost blind old manwho had once been in the post office and who had been fromimmemorial ages maintained by some one at Amalia Ivanovna's.

　　A retired clerk of the commissariat department came, too; he wasdrunk, had a loud and most unseemly laugh and only fancy- waswithout a waistcoat! One of the visitors sat straight down to thetable without even greeting Katerina Ivanovna. Finally one personhaving no suit appeared in his dressing gown, but this was too much,and the efforts of Amalia Ivanovna and the Pole succeeded inremoving him. The Pole brought with him, however, two other Poleswho did not live at Amalia Ivanovna's and whom no one had seen herebefore. All this irritated Katerina Ivanovna intensely. "For whomhad they made all these preparations then?" To make room for thevisitors the children had not even been laid for at the table; but thetwo little ones were sitting on a bench in the furthest corner withtheir dinner laid on a box, while Polenka as a big girl had to lookafter them, feed them, and keep their noses wiped like well-bredchildren's.

　　Katerina Ivanovna, in fact, could hardly help meeting her guestswith increased dignity, and even haughtiness. She stared at some ofthem with special severity, and loftily invited them to take theirseats. Rushing to the conclusion that Amalia Ivanovna must beresponsible for those who were absent, she began treating her withextreme nonchalance, which the latter promptly observed andresented. Such a beginning was no good omen for the end. All wereseated at last.

　　Raskolnikov came in almost at the moment of their return from thecemetery. Katerina Ivanovna was greatly delighted to see him, in thefirst place, because he was the one "educated visitor, and, as everyone knew, was in two years to take a professorship in the university,"and secondly because he immediately and respectfully apologised forhaving been unable to be at the funeral. She positively pounced uponhim, and made him sit on her left hand (Amalia Ivanovna was on herright). In spite of her continual anxiety that the dishes should bepassed round correctly and that every one should taste them, inspite of the agonising cough which interrupted her every minute andseemed to have grown worse during the last few days she hastened topour out in a half whisper to Raskolnikov all her suppressedfeelings and her just indignation at the failure of the dinner,interspersing her remarks with lively and uncontrollable laughter atthe expense of her visitors and especially of her landlady.

　　"It's all that cuckoo's fault! You know whom I mean? Her, her!"Katerina Ivanovna nodded towards the landlady. "Look at her, she'smaking round eyes, she feels that we are talking about her and can'tunderstand. Pfoo, the owl! Ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.) And what doesshe put on that cap for? (Cough-cough-cough.) Have you noticed thatshe wants every one to consider that she is patronising me and doingme an honour by being here? I asked her like a sensible woman toinvite people, especially those who knew my late husband, and lookat the set of fools she has brought! The sweeps! Look at that one withthe spotty face. And those wretched Poles, ha-ha-ha!(Cough-cough-cough.) Not one of them has ever poked his nose inhere, I've never set eyes on them. What have they come here for, I askyou? There they sit in a row. Hey, Pan!" she cried suddenly to oneof them, "have you tasted the pancakes? Take some more! Have somebeer! Won't you have some vodka? Look, he's jumped up and is makinghis bows, they must be quite starved, poor things. Never mind, letthem eat! They don't make a noise, anyway, though I'm really afraidfor our landlady's silver spoons... Amalia Ivanovna!" she addressedher suddenly, almost aloud, "if your spoons should happen to bestolen, I won't be responsible, I warn you! Ha-ha-ha!" She laughedturning to Raskolnikov, and again nodding towards the landlady, inhigh glee at her sally. "She didn't understand, she didn'tunderstand again! Look how she sits with her mouth open! An owl, areal owl! An owl in new ribbons, ha-ha-ha!"

　　Here her laugh turned again to an insufferable fit of coughingthat lasted five minutes. Drops of perspiration stood out on herforehead and her handkerchief was stained with blood. She showedRaskolnikov the blood in silence, and as soon as she could get herbreath began whispering to him again with extreme animation and ahectic flush on her cheeks.

　　"Do you know, I gave her the most delicate instructions, so tospeak, for inviting that lady and her daughter, you understand of whomI am speaking? It needed the utmost delicacy, the greatest nicety, butshe has managed things so that that fool, that conceited baggage, thatprovincial nonentity, simply because she is the widow of a major,and has come to try and get a pension and to fray out her skirts inthe government offices, because at fifty she paints her face(everybody knows it)... a creature like that did not think fit tocome, and has not even answered the invitation, which the mostordinary good manners required! I can't understand why PyotrPetrovitch has not come! But where's Sonia? Where has she gone? Ah,there she is at last! what is it, Sonia, where have you been? It's oddthat even at your father's funeral you should be so unpunctual. RodionRomanovitch, make room for her beside you. That's your place, Sonia...take what you like. Have some of the cold entree with jelly, that'sthe best. They'll bring the pancakes directly. Have they given thechildren some? Polenka, have you got everything?(Cough-cough-cough.) That's all right. Be a good girl, Lida, and,Kolya, don't fidget with your feet; sit like a little gentleman.What are you saying, Sonia?"

　　Sonia hastened to give her Pyotr Petrovitch's apologies, trying tospeak loud enough for every one to hear and carefully choosing themost respectful phrases which she attributed to Pyotr Petrovitch.She added that Pyotr Petrovitch had particularly told her to say that,as soon as he possibly could, he would come immediately to discussbusiness alone with her and to consider what could be done for her,&c., &c.

　　Sonia knew that this would comfort Katerina Ivanovna, wouldflatter her and gratify her pride. She sat down beside Raskolnikov;she made him a hurried bow, glancing curiously at him. But for therest of the time she seemed to avoid looking at him or speaking tohim. She seemed absent-minded, though she kept looking at KaterinaIvanovna, trying to please her. Neither she nor Katerina Ivanovnahad been able to get mourning; Sonia was wearing dark brown, andKaterina Ivanovna had on her only dress, a dark striped cotton one.

　　The message from Pyotr Petrovitch was very successful. Listeningto Sonia with dignity, Katerina Ivanovna inquired with equal dignityhow Pyotr Petrovitch was, then at once whispered almost aloud toRaskolnikov that it certainly would have been strange for a man ofPyotr Petrovitch's position and standing to find himself in such"extraordinary company," in spite of his devotion to her family andhis old friendship with her father.

　　"That's why I am so grateful to you, Rodion Romanovitch, that youhave not disdained my hospitality, even in such surroundings," sheadded almost aloud. "But I am sure that it was only your specialaffection for my poor husband that has made you keep your promise."

　　Then once more with pride and dignity she scanned her visitors,and suddenly inquired aloud across the table of the deaf man:"wouldn't he have some more meat, and had he been given some wine?"The old man made no answer and for a long while could not understandwhat he was asked, though his neighbours amused themselves by pokingand shaking him. He simply gazed about him with his mouth open,which only increased the general mirth.

　　"What an imbecile! Look, look! Why was he brought? But as to PyotrPetrovitch, I always had confidence in him," Katerina Ivanovnacontinued, "and, of course, he is not like..." with an extremely sternface she addressed Amalia Ivanovna so sharply and loudly that thelatter was quite disconcerted, "not like your dressed updraggletails whom my father would not have taken as cooks into hiskitchen, and my late husband would have done them honour if he hadinvited them in the goodness of his heart."

　　"Yes, he was fond of drink, he was fond of it, he did drink!"cried the commissariat clerk, gulping down his twelfth glass of vodka.

　　"My late husband certainly had that weakness, and every one knowsit," Katerina Ivanovna attacked him at once, "but he was a kind andhonourable man, who loved and respected his family. The worst of itwas his good nature made him trust all sorts of disreputable people,and he drank with fellows who were not worth the sole of his shoe.Would you believe it, Rodion Romanovitch, they found a gingerbreadcock in his pocket; he was dead drunk, but he did not forget thechildren!"

　　"A cock? Did you say a cock?" shouted the commissariat clerk.

　　Katerina Ivanovna did not vouchsafe a reply. She sighed, lost inthought.

　　"No doubt you think, like every one, that I was too severe withhim," she went on, addressing Raskolnikov. "But that's not so! Herespected me, he respected me very much! He was a kind-hearted man!And how sorry I was for him sometimes! He would sit in a corner andlook at me, I used to feel so sorry for him, I used to want to be kindto him and then would think to myself: 'be kind to him and he willdrink again,' it was only by severity that you could keep him withinbounds."

　　"Yes, he used to get his hair pulled pretty often," roared thecommissariat clerk again, swallowing another glass of vodka.

　　"Some fools would be the better for a good drubbing, as well ashaving their hair pulled. I am not talking of my late husband now!"Katerina Ivanovna snapped at him.

　　The flush on her cheeks grew more and more marked, her chest heaved.In another minute she would have been ready to make a scene. Many ofthe visitors were sniggering, evidently delighted. They began pokingthe commissariat clerk and whispering something to him. They wereevidently trying to egg him on.

　　"Allow me to ask what are you alluding to," began the clerk, "thatis to say, whose... about whom... did you say just now... But Idon't care! That's nonsense! Widow! I forgive you.... Pass!"

　　And he took another drink of vodka.

　　Raskolnikov sat in silence, listening with disgust. He only ate frompoliteness, just tasting the food that Katerina Ivanovna wascontinually putting on his plate, to avoid hurting her feelings. Hewatched Sonia intently. But Sonia became more and more anxious anddistressed; she, too, foresaw that the dinner would not end peaceably,and saw with terror Katerina Ivanovna's growing irritation. She knewthat she, Sonia, was the chief reason for the 'genteel' ladies'contemptuous treatment of Katerina Ivanovna's invitation. She hadheard from Amalia Ivanovna that the mother was positively offendedat the invitation and had asked the question: "how could she let herdaughter sit down beside that young person?" Sonia had a feelingthat Katerina Ivanovna had already heard this and an insult to Soniameant more to Katerina Ivanovna than an insult to herself, herchildren, or her father, Sonia knew that Katerina Ivanovna would notbe satisfied now, "till she had shown those draggletails that theywere both..." To make matters worse some one passed Sonia, from theother end of the table, a plate with two hearts pierced with an arrow,cut out of black bread. Katerina Ivanovna flushed crimson and atonce said aloud across the table that the man who sent it was "adrunken ass!"

　　Amalia Ivanovna was foreseeing something amiss, and at the same timedeeply wounded by Katerina Ivanovna's haughtiness, and to restorethe good-humour of the company and raise herself in their esteem shebegan, apropos of nothing, telling a story about an acquaintance ofhers "Karl from the chemist's," who was driving one night in a cab,and that "the cabman wanted him to kill, and Karl very much begged himnot to kill, and wept and clasped hands, and frightened and fromfear pierced his heart." Though Katerina Ivanovna smiled, she observedat once that Amalia Ivanovna ought not to tell anecdotes in Russian;the latter was still more offended, and she retorted that her "Vateraus Berlin was a very important man, and always went with his hands inpockets." Katerina Ivanovna could not restrain herself and laughedso much that Amalia Ivanovna lost patience and could scarcelycontrol herself.

　　"Listen to the owl!" Katerina Ivanovna whispered at once, hergood-humour almost restored, "she meant to say he kept his hands inhis pockets, but she said he put his hands in people's pockets.(Cough-cough.) And have you noticed, Rodion Romanovitch, that allthese Petersburg foreigners, the Germans especially, are allstupider than we! Can you fancy any one of us telling how 'Karl fromthe chemist's pierced his heart from fear' and that the idiotinstead of punishing the cabman, 'clasped his hands and wept, and muchbegged.' Ah, the fool! And you know she fancies it's very touching anddoes not suspect how stupid she is! To my thinking that drunkencommissariat clerk is a great deal cleverer, anyway one can see thathe has addled his brains with drink, but you know, these foreignersare always so well behaved and serious.... Look how she sitsglaring! She is angry, ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.)"

　　Regaining her good-humour, Katerina Ivanovna began at once tellingRaskolnikov that when she had obtained her pension, she intended toopen a school for the daughters of gentlemen in her native townT___. This was the first time she had spoken to him of the project,and she launched out into the most alluring details. It suddenlyappeared that Katerina Ivanovna had in her hands the verycertificate of honour of which Marmeladov had spoken to Raskolnikov inthe tavern, when he told him that Katerina Ivanovna, his wife, haddanced the shawl dance before the governor and other greatpersonages on leaving school. This certificate of honour was obviouslyintended now to prove Katerina Ivanovna's right to open aboarding-school; but she had armed herself with it chiefly with theobject of overwhelming "those two stuck-up draggletails" if theycame to the dinner, and proving incontestably that Katerina Ivanovnawas of the most noble, "she might even say aristocratic family, acolonel's daughter and was far superior to certain adventuresses whohave been so much to the fore of late." The certificate of honourimmediately passed into the hands of the drunken guests, andKaterina Ivanovna did not try to retain it, for it actuallycontained the statement en toutes lettres, that her father was ofthe rank of a major, and also a companion of an order, so that shereally was almost the daughter of a colonel.

　　Warming up, Katerina Ivanovna proceeded to enlarge on the peacefuland happy life they would lead in T___, on the gymnasium teachers whomshe would engage to give lessons in her boarding-school, one a mostrespectable old Frenchman, one Mangot, who had taught KaterinaIvanovna herself in old days and was still living in T___, and wouldno doubt teach in her school on moderate terms. Next she spoke ofSonia who would go with her to T___ and help her in all her plans.At this some one at the further end of the table gave a sudden guffaw.

　　Though Katerina Ivanovna tried to appear to be disdainfullyunaware of it, she raised her voice and began at once speaking withconviction of Sonia's undoubted ability to assist her, of "hergentleness, patience, devotion, generosity and good education,"tapping Sonia on the cheek and kissing her warmly twice. Sonia flushedcrimson, and Katerina Ivanovna suddenly burst into tears,immediately observing that she was "nervous and silly, that she wastoo much upset, that it was time to finish, and as the dinner wasover, it was time to hand round the tea."

　　At that moment, Amalia Ivanovna, deeply aggrieved at taking nopart in the conversation, and not being listened to, made one lasteffort, and with secret misgivings ventured on an exceedingly deep andweighty observation, that "in the future boarding-school she wouldhave to pay particular attention to die Wasche, and that therecertainly must be a good Dame to look after the linen, and secondlythat the young ladies must not novels at night read."

　　Katerina Ivanovna, who certainly was upset and very tired, as wellas heartily sick of the dinner, at once cut short Amalia Ivanovna,saying "she knew nothing about it and was talking nonsense, that itwas the business of the laundry maid, and not of the directress of ahigh-class boarding-school to look after die Wasche, and as fornovel reading, that was simply rudeness, and she begged her to besilent." Amalia Ivanovna fired up and getting angry observed thatshe only "meant her good," and that "she had meant her very good," andthat "it was long since she had paid her Gold for the lodgings."

　　Katerina Ivanovna at once "set her down," saying that it was a lieto say she wished her good, because only yesterday when her deadhusband was lying on the table, she had worried her about thelodgings. To this Amalia Ivanovna very appropriately observed that shehad invited those ladies, but "those ladies had not come, becausethose ladies are ladies and cannot come to a lady who is not alady." Katerina Ivanovna at once pointed out to her, that as she was aslut she could not judge what made one really a lady. AmaliaIvanovna at once declared that her "Vater aus Berlin was a very,very important man, and both hands in pockets went, and always used tosay: poof! poof!" and she leapt up from the table to represent herfather, sticking her hands in her pockets, puffing her cheeks, anduttering vague sounds resembling "poof! poof!" amid loud laughter fromall the lodgers, who purposely encouraged Amalia Ivanovna, hopingfor a fight.

　　But this was too much for Katerina Ivanovna, and she at oncedeclared, so that all could hear, that Amalia Ivanovna probablynever had a father, but was simply a drunken Petersburg Finn, andhad certainly once been a cook and probably something worse. AmaliaIvanovna turned as red as a lobster and squealed that perhaps KaterinaIvanovna never had a father, "but she had a vater aus Berlin andthat he wore a long coat and always said poof-poof-poof!"

　　Katerina Ivanovna observed contemptuously that all knew what herfamily was and that on that very certificate of honour it was statedin print that her father was a colonel, while Amalia Ivanovna'sfather- if she really had one- was probably some Finnish milkman,but that probably she never had a father at all, since it was stilluncertain whether her name was Amalia Ivanovna or Amalia Ludwigovna.

　　At this Amalia Ivanovna, lashed to fury, struck the table with herfist, and shrieked that she was Amalia Ivanovna, and not Ludwigovna,"that her Vater was named Johann and that he was a burgomeister, andthat Katerina Ivanovna's Vater was quite never a burgomeister."Katerina Ivanovna rose from her chair, and with a stern and apparentlycalm voice (though she was pale and her chest was heaving) observedthat "if she dared for one moment to set her contemptible wretch ofa father on a level with her papa, she, Katerina Ivanovna, wouldtear her cap off her head and trample it under foot." AmaliaIvanovna ran about the room, shouting at the top of her voice, thatshe was mistress of the house and that Katerina Ivanovna shouldleave the lodgings that minute; then she rushed for some reason tocollect the silver spoons from the table. There was a great outcry anduproar, the children began crying. Sonia ran to restrain KaterinaIvanovna, but when Amalia Ivanovna shouted something about "the yellowticket," Katerina Ivanovna pushed Sonia away, and rushed at thelandlady to carry out her threat.

　　At that minute the door opened, and Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin appearedon the threshold. He stood scanning the party with severe and vigilanteyes. Katerina Ivanovna rushed to him.

　　Chapter Three

　　"PYOTR PETROVITCH," she cried, "protect me... you at least! Makethis foolish woman understand that she can't behave like this to alady in misfortune... that there is a law for such things.... I'llgo to the governor-general himself.... She shall answer for it....Remembering my father's hospitality protect these orphans."

　　"Allow me, madam.... Allow me." Pyotr Petrovitch waved her off."Your papa, as you are well aware, I had not the honour of knowing"(some one laughed aloud) "and I do not intend to take part in youreverlasting squabbles with Amalia Ivanovna.... I have come here tospeak of my own affairs... and I want to have a word with yourstepdaughter, Sofya... Ivanovna, I think it is? Allow me to pass."

　　Pyotr Petrovitch, edging by her, went to the opposite corner whereSonia was.

　　Katerina Ivanovna remained standing where she was, as thoughthunderstruck. She could not understand how Pyotr Petrovitch coulddeny having enjoyed her father's hospitility. Though she hadinvented it herself, she believed in it firmly by this time. She wasstruck too by the businesslike, dry and even contemptuously menacingtone of Pyotr Petrovitch. All the clamour gradually died away at hisentrance. Not only was this "serious business man" strikinglyincongruous with the rest of the party, but it was evident, too,that he had come upon some matter of consequence, that someexceptional cause must have brought him and that therefore somethingwas going to happen. Raskolnikov, standing beside Sonia, moved asideto let him pass; Pyotr Petrovitch did not seem to notice him. A minutelater Lebeziatnikov, too, appeared in the doorway; he did not come in,but stood still, listening with marked interest, almost wonder, andseemed for a time perplexed.

　　"Excuse me for possibly interrupting you, but it's a matter ofsome importance," Pyotr Petrovitch observed, addressing the companygenerally. "I am glad indeed to find other persons present. AmaliaIvanovna, I humbly beg you as mistress of the house to pay carefulattention to what I have to say to Sofya Ivanovna. Sofya Ivanovna," hewent on, addressing Sonia, who was very much surprised and alreadyalarmed, "immediately after your visit I found that a hundred-roublenote was missing from my table, in the room of my friend Mr.Lebeziatnikov. If in any way whatever you know and will tell uswhere it is now, I assure you on my word of honour and call allpresent to witness that the matter shall end there. In the oppositecase I shall be compelled to have recourse to very serious measuresand then... you must blame yourself."

　　Complete silence reigned in the room. Even the crying childrenwere still. Sonia stood deadly pale, staring at Luzhin and unable tosay a word. She seemed not to understand. Some seconds passed.

　　"Well, how is it to be then?" asked Luzhin, looking intently at her.

　　"I don't know.... I know nothing about it," Sonia articulatedfaintly at last.

　　"No, you know nothing?" Luzhin repeated and again he paused for someseconds. "Think a moment, mademoiselle," he began severely, but still,as it were, admonishing her. "Reflect, I am prepared to give youtime for consideration. Kindly observe this: if I were not so entirelyconvinced I should not, you may be sure, with my experience venture toaccuse you so directly. Seeing that for such direct accusationbefore witnesses, if false or even mistaken, I should myself in acertain sense be made responsible, I am aware of that. This morningI changed for my own purposes several five per cent. securities forthe sum of approximately three thousand roubles. The account isnoted down in my pocket-book. On my return home I proceeded to countthe money,- as Mr. Lebeziatnikov will bear witness- and after countingtwo thousand three hundred roubles I put the rest in my pocket-book inmy coat pocket. About five hundred roubles remained on the table andamong them three notes of a hundred roubles each. At that moment youentered (at my invitation)- and all the time you were present you wereexceedingly embarrassed; so that three times you jumped up in themiddle of the conversation and tried to make off. Mr. Lebeziatnikovcan bear witness to this. You yourself, mademoiselle, probably willnot refuse to confirm my statement that I invited you through Mr.Lebeziatnikov, solely in order to discuss with you the hopeless anddestitute position of your relative, Katerina Ivanovna (whose dinner Iwas unable to attend), and the advisability of getting up something ofthe nature of a subscription, lottery or the like, for her benefit.You thanked me and even shed tears. I describe all this as it tookplace, primarily to recall it to your mind and secondly to show youthat not the slightest detail has escaped my recollection. Then I tooka ten-rouble note from the table and handed it to you by way offirst instalment on my part for the benefit of your relative. Mr.Lebeziatnikov saw all this. Then I accompanied you to the door,- youbeing still in the same state of embarrassment- after which, beingleft alone with Mr. Lebeziatnikov I talked to him for ten minutes,-then Mr. Lebeziatnikov went out and I returned to the table with themoney lying on it, intending to count it and to put it aside, as Iproposed doing before. To my surprise one hundred-rouble note haddisappeared. Kindly consider the position. Mr. Lebeziatnikov Icannot suspect. I am ashamed to allude to such a supposition. I cannothave made a mistake in my reckoning, for the minute before yourentrance I had finished my accounts and found the total correct. Youwill admit that recollecting your embarrassment, your eagerness to getaway and the fact that you kept your hands for some time on the table,and taking into consideration your social position and the habitsassociated with it, I was, so to say, with horror and positivelyagainst my will, compelled to entertain a suspicion- a cruel, butjustifiable suspicion! I will add further and repeat that in spiteof my positive conviction, I realise that I run a certain risk inmaking this accusation, but as you see, I could not let it pass. Ihave taken action and I will tell you why: solely, madam, solely,owing to your black ingratitude! Why! I invite you for the benefitof your destitute relative, I present you with my donation of tenroubles and you, on the spot, repay me for all that with such anaction. It is too bad! You need a lesson. Reflect! Moreover, like atrue friend I beg you- and you could have no better friend at thismoment- think what you are doing, otherwise I shall be immovable!Well, what do you say?"

　　"I have taken nothing," Sonia whispered in terror, "you gave meten roubles, here it is, take it."

　　Sonia pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket, untied a cornerof it, took out the ten rouble note and gave it to Luzhin.

　　"And the hundred roubles you do not confess to taking?" heinsisted reproachfully, not taking the note.

　　Sonia looked about her. All were looking at her with such awful,stern, ironical, hostile eyes. She looked at Raskolnikov... he stoodagainst the wall, with his arms crossed, looking at her with glowingeyes.

　　"Good God!" broke from Sonia.

　　"Amalia Ivanovna, we shall have to send word to the police andtherefore I humbly beg you meanwhile to send for the house porter,"Luzhin said softly and even kindly.

　　"Gott der barmherzige! I knew she was the thief," cried AmaliaIvanovna, throwing up her hands.

　　"You knew it?" Luzhin caught her up, "then I suppose you had somereason before this for thinking so. I beg you, worthy Amalia Ivanovna,to remember your words which have been uttered before witnesses."

　　There was a buzz of loud conversation on all sides. All were inmovement.

　　"What!" cried Katerina Ivanovna, suddenly realising the position,and she rushed at Luzhin. "What! You accuse her of stealing? Sonia?Ah, the wretches, the wretches!"

　　And running to Sonia she flung her wasted arms round her and heldher as in a vise.

　　"Sonia! how dared you take ten roubles from him? Foolish girl!Give it to me! Give me the ten roubles at once- here!

　　And snatching the note from Sonia, Katerina Ivanovna crumpled itup and flung it straight into Luzhin's face. It hit him in the eye andfell on the ground. Amalia Ivanovna hastened to pick it up. PyotrPetrovitch lost his temper.

　　"Hold that mad woman!" he shouted.

　　At that moment several other persons, besides Lebeziatnikov,appeared in the doorway, among them the two ladies.

　　"What! Mad? Am I mad? Idiot!" shrieked Katerina Ivanovna. "You arean idiot yourself, pettifogging lawyer, base man! Sonia, Sonia takehis money! Sonia a thief! Why, she'd give away her last penny!" andKaterina Ivanovna broke into hysterical laughter. "Did you ever seesuch an idiot?" she turned from side to side. "And you too?" shesuddenly saw the landlady, "and you too, sausage eater, you declarethat she is a thief, you trashy Prussian hen's leg in a crinoline! Shehasn't been out of this room: she came straight from you, youwretch, and sat down beside me, every one saw her. She sat here, byRodion Romanovitch. Search her! Since she's not left the room, themoney would have to be on her! Search her, search her! But if youdon't find it, then excuse me, my dear fellow, you'll answer for it!I'll go to our Sovereign, to our Sovereign, to our gracious Tsarhimself, and throw myself at his feet, to-day, this minute! I am alonein the world! They would let me in! Do you think they wouldn't? You'rewrong, I will get in! I will get in! You reckoned on her meekness! Yourelied upon that! But I am not so submissive, let me tell you!You've gone too far yourself. Search her, search her!"

　　And Katerina Ivanovna in a frenzy shook Luzhin and dragged himtowards Sonia.

　　"I am ready, I'll be responsible... but calm yourself, madam, calmyourself. I see that you are not so submissive!... Well, well, butas to that..." Luzhin muttered, "that ought to be before the police...though indeed there are witnesses enough as it is.... I am ready....But in any case it's difficult for a man... on account of hersex.... But with the help of Amalia Ivanovna... though, of course,it's not the way to do things.... How is it to be done?"

　　"As you will! Let any one who likes search her!" cried KaterinaIvanovna. "Sonia, turn out your pockets! See. Look, monster, thepocket is empty, here was her handkerchief! Here is the otherpocket, look! D'you see, d'you see?"

　　And Katerina Ivanovna turned- or rather snatched- both pocketsinside out. But from the right pocket a piece of paper flew out anddescribing a parabola in the air fell at Luzhin's feet. Every onesaw it, several cried out. Pyotr Petrovitch stooped down, picked upthe paper in two fingers, lifted it where all could see it andopened it. It was a hundred-rouble note folded in eight. PyotrPetrovitch held up the note showing it to every one.

　　"Thief! Out of my lodging. Police, police!" yelled AmaliaIvanovna. "They must to Siberia be sent! Away!"

　　Exclamations arose on all sides. Raskolnikov was silent, keeping hiseyes fixed on Sonia, except for an occasional rapid glance atLuzhin. Sonia stood still, as though unconscious. She was hardlyable to feel surprise. Suddenly the colour rushed to her cheeks; sheuttered a cry and hid her face in her hands.

　　"No, it wasn't I! I didn't take it! I know nothing about it," shecried with a heartrending wail, and she ran to Katerina Ivanovna,who clasped her tightly in her arms, as though she would shelter herfrom all the world.

　　"Sonia! Sonia! I don't believe it! You see, I don't believe it!" shecried in the face of the obvious fact, swaying her to and fro in herarms like a baby, kissing her face continually, then snatching ather hands and kissing them, too. "You took it! How stupid these peopleare! Oh dear! You are fools, fools," she cried, addressing the wholeroom, "you don't know, you don't know what a heart she has, what agirl she is! She take it, she? She'd sell her last rag, she'd gobarefoot to help you if you needed it, that's what she is! She has theyellow passport because my children were starving, she sold herselffor us! Ah, husband, husband! Do you see? Do you see? What amemorial dinner for you! Merciful heavens! Defend her, why are you allstanding still? Rodion Romanovitch, why don't you stand up for her? Doyou believe it, too? You are not worth her little finger, all of youtogether! Good God! Defend her now, at least!"

　　The wail of the poor, consumptive, helpless woman seemed toproduce a great effect on her audience. The agonised, wasted,consumptive face, the parched blood-stained lips, the hoarse voice,the tears unrestrained as a child's, the trustful, childish and yetdespairing prayer for help were so piteous that every one seemed tofeel for her. Pyotr Petrovitch at any rate was at once moved tocompassion.

　　"Madam, madam, this incident does not reflect upon you!" he criedimpressively, "no one would take upon himself to accuse you of beingan instigator or even an accomplice in it, especially as you haveproved her guilt by turning out her pockets, showing that you had noprevious idea of it. I am most ready, most ready to show compassion,if poverty, so to speak, drove Sofya Semyonovna to it, but why did yourefuse to confess, mademoiselle? Were you afraid of the disgrace?The first step? You lost your head, perhaps? One can quiteunderstand it.... But how could you have lowered yourself to such anaction? Gentlemen," he addressed the whole company, "gentlemen!Compassionate and so to say commiserating these people, I am readyto overlook it even now in spite of the personal insult lavishedupon me! And may this disgrace be a lesson to you for the future,"he said, addressing Sonia, "and I will carry the matter no further.Enough!"

　　Pyotr Petrovitch stole a glance at Raskolnikov. Their eyes met,and the fire in Raskolnikov's seemed ready to reduce him to ashes.Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna apparently heard nothing. She waskissing and hugging Sonia like a madwoman. The children, too, wereembracing Sonia on all sides, and Polenka,- though she did not fullyunderstand what was wrong,- was drowned in tears and shaking withsobs, as she hid her pretty little face, swollen with weeping, onSonia's shoulder.

　　"How vile!" a loud voice cried suddenly in the doorway.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch looked round quickly.

　　"What vileness!" Lebeziatnikov repeated, staring him straight in theface.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch gave a positive start- all noticed it andrecalled it afterwards. Lebeziatnikov strode into the room.

　　"And you dared to call me as witness?" he said, going up to PyotrPetrovitch.

　　"What do you mean? What are you talking about?" muttered Luzhin.

　　"I mean that you... are a slanderer, that's what my words mean!"Lebeziatnikov said hotly, looking sternly at him with his shortsightedeyes.

　　He was extremely angry. Raskolnikov gazed intently at him, as thoughseizing and weighing each word. Again there was a silence. PyotrPetrovitch indeed seemed almost dumbfounded for the first moment.

　　"If you mean that for me,..." he began, stammering. "But what'sthe matter with you? Are you out of your mind?"

　　"I'm in my mind, but you are a scoundrel! Ah, how vile! I have heardeverything. I kept waiting on purpose to understand it, for I must owneven now it is not quite logical.... What you have done it all for Ican't understand."

　　"Why, what have I done then? Give over talking in your nonsensicalriddles! Or maybe you are drunk!"

　　"You may be a drunkard, perhaps, vile man, but I am not! I nevertouch vodka, for it's against my convictions. Would you believe it,he, he himself, with his own hands gave Sofya Semyonovna thathundred-rouble note- I saw it, I was a witness, I'll take my oath!He did it, he!" repeated Lebeziatnikov, addressing all.

　　"Are you crazy, milksop?" squealed Luzhin. "She is herself beforeyou,- she herself here declared just now before every one that Igave her only ten roubles. How could I have given it to her?"

　　"I saw it, I saw it," Lebeziatnikov repeated, "and although it isagainst my principles, I am ready this very minute to take any oathyou like before the court, for I saw how you slipped it in her pocket.Only like a fool I thought you did it out of kindness! When you weresaying good-bye to her at the door, while you held her hand in onehand, with the other, the left, you slipped the note into herpocket. I saw it, I saw it!"

　　Luzhin turned pale.

　　"What lies!" he cried impudently, "why, how could you, standing bythe window, see the note! You fancied it with your shortsightedeyes. You are raving!"

　　"No, I didn't fancy it. And though I was standing some way off, Isaw it all. And though it certainly would be hard to distinguish anote from the window,- that's true- I knew for certain that it was ahundred-rouble note, because, when you were going to give SofyaSemyonovna ten roubles, you took up from the table a hundred-roublenote (I saw it because I was standing near then, and an idea struck meat once, so that I did not forget you had it in your hand). You foldedit and kept it in your hand all the time. I didn't think of it againuntil, when you were getting up, you changed it from your right handto your left and nearly dropped it! I noticed it because the same ideastruck me again, that you meant to do her a kindness without myseeing. You can fancy how I watched you and I saw how you succeeded inslipping it into her pocket. I saw it, I saw it, I'll take my oath."

　　Lebeziatnikov was almost breathless. Exclamations arose on all handschiefly expressive of wonder, but some were menacing in tone. They allcrowded round Pyotr Petrovitch. Katerina Ivanovna flew toLebeziatnikov.

　　"I was mistaken in you! Protect her! You are the only one to takeher part! She is an orphan. God has sent you!"

　　Katerina Ivanovna, hardly knowing what she was doing, sank on herknees before him.

　　"A pack of nonsense!" yelled Luzhin, roused to fury, "it's allnonsense you've been talking! 'An idea struck you, you didn't think,you noticed'- what does it amount to? So I gave it to her on the slyon purpose? What for? With what object? What have I to do withthis...?"

　　"What for? That's what I can't understand, but that what I amtelling you is the fact, that's certain! So far from my beingmistaken, you infamous, criminal man, I remember how, on account ofit, a question occurred to me at once, just when I was thanking youand pressing your hand. What made you put it secretly in her pocket?Why you did it secretly, I mean? Could it be simply to conceal it fromme, knowing that my convictions are opposed to yours and that I do notapprove of private benevolence, which effects no radical cure? Well, Idecided that you really were ashamed of giving such a large sum beforeme. Perhaps, too, I thought, he wants to give her a surprise, when shefinds a whole hundred-rouble note in her pocket. (For I know somebenevolent people are very fond of decking out their charitableactions in that way.) Then the idea struck me, too, that you wanted totest her, to see whether, when she found it, she would come to thankyou. Then, too, that you wanted to avoid thanks and that, as thesaying is, your right hand should not know... something of thatsort, in fact. I thought of so many possibilities that I put offconsidering it, but still thought it indelicate to show you I knewyour secret. But another idea struck me again that Sofya Semyonovnamight easily lose the money before she noticed it, that was why Idecided to come in here to call her out of the room and to tell herthat you put a hundred roubles in her pocket. But on my way I wentfirst to Madame Kobilatnikov's to take them the 'General Treatise onthe Positive Method' and especially to recommend Piderit's article(and also Wagner's); then I come on here and what a state of thingsI find! Now could I, could I, have all these ideas and reflections, ifI had not seen you put the hundred-rouble note in her pocket?"

　　When Lebeziatnikov finished his long-winded harangue with thelogical deduction at the end, he was quite tired, and the perspirationstreamed from his face. He could not, alas, even express himselfcorrectly in Russian, though he knew no other language, so that he wasquite exhausted, almost emaciated after this heroic exploit. But hisspeech produced a powerful effect. He had spoken with suchvehemence, with such conviction that every one obviously believed him.Pyotr Petrovitch felt that things were going badly with him.

　　"What is it to do with me if silly ideas did occur to you?" heshouted, "that's no evidence. You may have dreamt it, that's all!And I tell you, you are lying, sir. You are lying and slanderingfrom some spite against me, simply from pique, because I did not agreewith your freethinking, godless, social propositions!"

　　But this retort did not benefit Pyotr Petrovitch. Murmurs ofdisapproval were heard on all sides.

　　"Ah, that's your line now, is it!" cried Lebeziatnikov, "that'snonsense! Call the police and I'll take my oath! There's only onething I can't understand: what made him risk such a contemptibleaction. Oh, pitiful, despicable man!"

　　"I can explain why he risked such an action, and if necessary, I,too, will swear to it," Raskolnikov said at last in a firm voice,and he stepped forward.

　　He appeared to be firm and composed. Every one felt clearly, fromthe very look of him that he really knew about it and that the mysterywould be solved.

　　"Now I can explain it all to myself," said Raskolnikov, addressingLebeziatnikov. "From the very beginning of the business, I suspectedthat there was some scoundrelly intrigue at the bottom of it. Ibegan to suspect it from some special circumstances known to meonly, which I will explain at once to every one: they account foreverything. Your valuable evidence has finally made everything clearto me. I beg all, all to listen. This gentleman (he pointed to Luzhin)was recently engaged to be married to a young lady- my sister, AvdotyaRomanovna Raskolnikov. But coming to Petersburg he quarrelled with me,the day before yesterday, at our first meeting and I drove him outof my room- I have two witnesses to prove it. He is a very spitefulman.... The day before yesterday I did not know that he was stayinghere, in your room, and that consequently on the very day wequarrelled- the day before yesterday- he saw me give Katerina Ivanovnasome money for the funeral, as a friend of the late Mr. Marmeladov. Heat once wrote a note to my mother and informed her that I had givenaway all my money, not to Katerina Ivanovna, but to SofyaSemyonovna, and referred in a most contemptible way to the...character of Sofya Semyonovna, that is, hinted at the character ofmy attitude to Sofya Semyonovna. All this you understand was withthe object of dividing me from my mother and sister, by insinuatingthat I was squandering on unworthy objects the money which they hadsent me and which was all they had. Yesterday evening, before mymother and sister and in his presence, I declared that I had given themoney to Katerina Ivanovna for the funeral and not to Sofya Semyonovnaand that I had no acquaintance with Sofya Semyonovna and had neverseen her before, indeed. At the same time I added that he, PyotrPetrovitch Luzhin, with all his virtues was not worth SofyaSemyonovna's little finger, though he spoke so ill of her. To hisquestion- would I let Sofya Semyonovna sit down beside my sister, Ianswered that I had already done so that day. Irritated that my motherand sister were unwilling to quarrel with me at his insinuations, hegradually began being unpardonably rude to them. A final rupturetook place and he was turned out of the house. All this happenedyesterday evening. Now I beg your special attention: consider: if hehad now succeeded in proving that Sofya Semyonovna was a thief, hewould have shown to my mother and sister that he was almost right inhis suspicions, that he had reason to be angry at my putting my sisteron a level with Sofya Semyonovna, that, in attacking me, he wasprotecting and preserving the honour of my sister, his betrothed. Infact he might even, through all this, have been able to estrange mefrom my family, and no doubt he hoped to be restored to favour withthem; to say nothing of revenging himself on me personally, for he hasgrounds for supposing that the honour and happiness of SofyaSemyonovna are very precious to me. That was what he was workingfor! That's how I understand it. That's the whole reason for it andthere can be no other!"

　　It was like this, or somewhat like this, that Raskolnikov wound uphis speech which was followed very attentively, though ofteninterrupted by exclamations from his audience. But in spite ofinterruptions he spoke clearly, calmly, exactly, firmly. Hisdecisive voice, his tone of conviction and his stern face made a greatimpression on every one.

　　"Yes, yes, that's it," Lebeziatnikov assented gleefully, "thatmust be it, for he asked me, as soon as Sofya Semyonovna came into ourroom, whether you were here, whether I had seen you among KaterinaIvanovna's guests. He called me aside to the window and asked me insecret. It was essential for him that you should be here! That's it,that's it!"

　　Luzhin smiled contemptuously and did not speak. But he was verypale. He seemed to be deliberating on some means of escape. Perhaps hewould have been glad to give up everything and get away, but at themoment this was scarcely possible. It would have implied admitting thetruth of the accusations brought against him. Moreover, the company,which had already been excited by drink, was now too much stirred toallow it. The commissariat clerk, though indeed he had not grasped thewhole position, was shouting louder than any one and was making somesuggestions very unpleasant to Luzhin. But not all those presentwere drunk; lodgers came in from all the rooms. The three Poles weretremendously excited and were continually shouting at him: "The Pan isa lajdak!" and muttering threats in Polish. Sonia had been listeningwith strained attention, though she too seemed unable to grasp it all;she seemed as though she had just returned to consciousness. She didnot take her eyes off Raskolnikov, feeling that all her safety layin him. Katerina Ivanovna breathed hard and painfully and seemedfearfully exhausted. Amalia Ivanovna stood looking more stupid thanany one, with her mouth wide open, unable to make out what hadhappened. She only saw that Pyotr Petrovitch had somehow come togrief.

　　Raskolnikov was attempting to speak again, but they did not let him.Every one was crowding round Luzhin with threats and shouts ofabuse. But Pyotr Petrovitch was not intimidated. Seeing that hisaccusation of Sonia had completely failed, he had recourse toinsolence:

　　"Allow me, gentlemen, allow me! Don't squeeze, let me pass!" hesaid, making his way through the crowd. "And no threats if you please!I assure you it will be useless, you will gain nothing by it. On thecontrary, you'll have to answer, gentlemen, for violentlyobstructing the course of justice. The thief has been more thanunmasked, and I shall prosecute. Our judges are not so blind and...not so drunk, and will not believe the testimony of two notoriousinfidels, agitators, and atheists, who accuse me from motives ofpersonal revenge which they are foolish enough to admit.... Yes, allowme to pass!"

　　"Don't let me find a trace of you in my room! Kindly leave atonce, and everything is at an end between us! When I think of thetrouble I've been taking, the way I've been expounding... all thisfortnight!"

　　"I told you myself to-day that I was going, when you tried to keepme; now I will simply add that you are a fool. I advise you to see adoctor for your brains and your short sight. Let me pass, gentlemen!"

　　He forced his way through. But the commissariat clerk wasunwilling to let him off so easily: he picked up a glass from thetable, brandished it in the air and flung it at Pyotr Petrovitch;but the glass flew straight at Amalia Ivanovna. She screamed, andthe clerk, overbalancing, fell heavily under the table. PyotrPetrovitch made his way to his room and half an hour later had leftthe house. Sonia, timid by nature, had felt before that day that shecould be ill-treated more easily than any one, and that she could bewronged with impunity. Yet till that moment she had fancied that shemight escape misfortune by care, gentleness and submissivenessbefore every one. Her disappointment was too great. She could, ofcourse, bear with patience and almost without murmur anything, eventhis. But for the first minute she felt it too bitter. In spite of hertriumph and her justification- when her first terror andstupefaction had passed and she could understand it all clearly- thefeeling of her helplessness and of the wrong done to her made herheart throb with anguish and she was overcome with hysterical weeping.At last, unable to bear any more, she rushed out of the room and ranhome, almost immediately after Luzhin's departure. When amidst loudlaughter the glass flew at Amalia Ivanovna, it was more than thelandlady could endure. With a shriek she rushed like a fury atKaterina Ivanovna, considering her to blame for everything.

　　"Out of my lodgings! At once! Quick march!"

　　And with these words she began snatching up everything she could layher hands on that belonged to Katerina Ivanovna, and throwing it onthe floor, Katerina Ivanovna, pale, almost fainting, and gasping forbreath, jumped up from the bed where she had sunk in exhaustion anddarted at Amalia Ivanovna. But the battle was too unequal: thelandlady waved her away like a feather.

　　"What! As though that godless calumny was not enough- this vilecreature attacks me! What! On the day of my husband's funeral I amturned out of my lodgings! After eating my bread and salt she turns meinto the street, with my orphans! Where am I to go?" wailed the poorwoman, sobbing and gasping. "Good God!" she cried with flashingeyes, "is there no justice upon earth? Whom should you protect ifnot us orphans? We shall see! There is law and justice on earth, thereis, I will find it! Wait a bit, godless creature! Polenka, stay withthe children, I'll come back. Wait for me, if you have to wait inthe street. We will see whether there is justice on earth!"

　　And throwing over her head that green shawl which Marmeladov hadmentioned to Raskolnikov, Katerina Ivanovna squeezed her way throughthe disorderly and drunken crowd of lodgers who still filled the room,and, wailing and tearful, she ran into the street- with a vagueintention of going at once somewhere to find justice. Polenka with thetwo little ones in her arms crouched, terrified, on the trunk in thecorner of the room, where she waited trembling for her mother tocome back. Amalia Ivanovna raged about the room, shrieking,lamenting and throwing everything she came across on the floor. Thelodgers talked incoherently, some commented to the best of theirability on what had happened, others quarreled and swore at oneanother, while others struck up a song....

　　"Now it's time for me to go," thought Raskolnikov. "Well, SofyaSemyonovna, we shall see what you'll say now!"

　　And he set off in the direction of Sonia's lodgings.

　　Chapter Four

　　RASKOLNIKOV had been a vigorous and active champion of Sonia againstLuzhin, although he had such a load of horror and anguish in his ownheart. But having gone through so much in the morning, he found a sortof relief in a change of sensations, apart from the strong personalfeeling which impelled him to defend Sonia. He was agitated too,especially at some moments, by the thought of his approachinginterview with Sonia: he had to tell her who had killed Lizaveta. Heknew the terrible suffering it would be to him and, as it were,brushed away the thought of it. So when he cried as he left KaterinaIvanovna's, "Well, Sofya Semyonovna, we shall see what you'll saynow!" he was still superficially excited, still vigorous and defiantfrom his triumph over Luzhin. But, strange to say, by the time hereached Sonia's lodging, he felt a sudden impotence and fear. He stoodstill in hesitation at the door, asking himself the strangequestion: "Must I tell her who killed Lizaveta?" It was a strangequestion because he felt at the very time not only that he could nothelp telling her, but also that he could not put off the telling. Hedid not yet know why it must be so, he only felt it, and the agonisingsense of his impotence before the inevitable almost crushed him. Tocut short his hesitation and suffering, he quickly opened the door andlooked at Sonia from the doorway. She was sitting with her elbows onthe table and her face in her hands, but seeing Raskolnikov she got upat once and came to meet him as though she were expecting him.

　　"What would have become of me but for you!" she said quickly,meeting him in the middle of the room.

　　Evidently she was in haste to say this to him. It was what she hadbeen waiting for.

　　Raskolnikov went to the table and sat down on the chair from whichshe had only just risen. She stood facing him, two steps away, just asshe had done the day before.

　　"Well, Sonia?" he said, and felt that his voice was trembling, "itwas all due to 'your social position and the habits associated withit.' Did you understand that just now?"

　　Her face showed her distress.

　　"Only don't talk to me as you did yesterday," she interrupted him."Please don't begin it. There is misery enough without that."

　　She made haste to smile, afraid that he might not like the reproach.

　　"I was silly to come away from there. What is happening there now? Iwanted to go back directly, but I kept thinking that... you wouldcome."

　　He told her that Amalia Ivanovna was turning them out of theirlodging and that Katerina Ivanovna had run off somewhere "to seekjustice."

　　"My God!" cried Sonia, "let's go at once...."

　　And she snatched up her cape.

　　"It's everlastingly the same thing!" said Raskolnikov, irritably."You've no thought except for them! Stay a little with me."

　　"But... Katerina Ivanovna?"

　　"You won't lose Katerina Ivanovna, you may be sure, she'll come toyou herself since she has run out," he added peevishly. "If shedoesn't find you here, you'll be blamed for it...."

　　Sonia sat down in painful suspense. Raskolnikov was silent, gazingat the floor and deliberating.

　　"This time Luzhin did not want to prosecute you," he began, notlooking at Sonia, "but if he had wanted to, if it had suited hisplans, he would have sent you to prison if it had not been forLebeziatnikov and me. Ah?"

　　"Yes," she assented in a faint voice. "Yes," she repeated,preoccupied and distressed.

　　"But I might easily not have been there. And it was quite anaccident Lebeziatnikov's turning up."

　　Sonia was silent.

　　"And if you'd gone to prison, what then? Do you remember what I saidyesterday?"

　　Again she did not answer. He waited.

　　"I thought you would cry out again 'don't speak of it, leaveoff.'" Raskolnikov gave a laugh, but rather a forced one. "What,silence again?" he asked a minute later. "We must talk aboutsomething, you know. It would be interesting for me to know how youwould decide a certain 'problem' as Lebeziatnikov would say." (Hewas beginning to lose the thread.) "No, really, I am serious. Imagine,Sonia, that you had known all Luzhin's intentions beforehand. Known,that is, for a fact, that they would be the ruin of KaterinaIvanovna and the children and yourself thrown in- since you don'tcount yourself for anything- Polenka too... for she'll go the sameway. Well, if suddenly it all depended on your decision whether heor they should go on living, that is whether Luzhin should go onliving and doing wicked things, or Katerina Ivanovna should die? Howwould you decide which of them was to die? I ask you?"

　　Sonia looked uneasily at him. There was something peculiar in thishesitating question, which seemed approaching something in aroundabout way.

　　"I felt that you were going to ask some question like that," shesaid, looking inquisitively at him.

　　"I dare say you did. But how is it to be answered?"

　　"Why do you ask about what could not happen?" said Soniareluctantly.

　　"Then it would be better for Luzhin to go on living and doing wickedthings? You haven't dared to decide even that!"

　　"But I can't know the Divine Providence.... And why do you askwhat can't be answered? What's the use of such foolish questions?How could it happen that it should depend on my decision- who has mademe a judge to decide who is to live and who is not to live?"

　　"Oh, if the Divine Providence is to be mixed up in it, there is nodoing anything," Raskolnikov grumbled morosely.

　　"You'd better say straight out what you want!" Sonia cried indistress. "You are leading up to something again.... Can you have comesimply to torture me?"

　　She could not control herself and began crying bitterly. He lookedat her in gloomy misery. Five minutes passed.

　　"Of course you're right, Sonia," he said softly at last. He wassuddenly changed. His tone of assumed arrogance and helplessdefiance was gone. Even his voice was suddenly weak. "I told youyesterday that I was not coming to ask forgiveness and almost thefirst thing I've said is to ask forgiveness.... I said that aboutLuzhin and Providence for my own sake. I was asking forgiveness,Sonia...."

　　He tried to smile, but there was something helpless and incompletein his pale smile. He bowed his head and hid his face in his hands.

　　And suddenly a strange, surprising sensation of a sort of bitterhatred for Sonia passed through his heart. As it were wondering andfrightened of this sensation, he raised his head and looked intentlyat her; but he met her uneasy and painfully anxious eyes fixed on him;there was love in them; his hatred vanished like a phantom. It was notthe real feeling; he had taken the one feeling for the other. Itonly meant that that minute had come.

　　He hid his face in his hands again and bowed his head. Suddenly heturned pale, got up from his chair, looked at Sonia, and withoututtering a word sat down mechanically on her bed.

　　His sensations that moment were terribly like the moment when he hadstood over the old woman with the axe in his hand and felt that "hemust not lose another minute."

　　"What's the matter?" asked Sonia, dreadfully frightened.

　　He could not utter a word. This was not at all, not at all the wayhe had intended to "tell" and he did not understand what was happeningto him now. She went up to him, softly, sat down on the bed beside himand waited, not taking her eyes off him. Her heart throbbed andsank. It was unendurable; he turned his deadly pale face to her. Hislips worked, helplessly struggling to utter something. A pang ofterror passed through Sonia's heart.

　　"What's the matter?" she repeated, drawing a little away from him.

　　"Nothing, Sonia, don't be frightened.... It's nonsense. It really isnonsense, if you think of it," he muttered, like a man in delirium."Why have I come to torture you?" he added suddenly, looking at her."Why, really? I keep asking myself that question, Sonia...."

　　He had perhaps been asking himself that question a quarter of anhour before, but now he spoke helplessly, hardly knowing what hesaid and feeling a continual tremor all over.

　　"Oh, how you are suffering!" she muttered in distress, lookingintently at him.

　　"It's all nonsense.... Listen, Sonia." He suddenly smiled, a palehelpless smile for two seconds. "You remember what I meant to tell youyesterday?"

　　Sonia waited uneasily.

　　"I said as I went away that perhaps I was saying good-bye forever, but that if I came to-day I would tell you who... who killedLizaveta."

　　She began trembling all over.

　　"Well, here I've come to tell you."

　　"Then you really meant it yesterday?" she whispered with difficulty."How do you know?" she asked quickly, as though suddenly regaining herreason.

　　Sonia's face grew paler and paler, and she breathed painfully.

　　"I know."

　　She paused a minute.

　　"Have they found him?" she asked timidly.

　　"No."

　　"Then how do you know about it?" she asked again, hardly audibly andagain after a minute's pause.

　　He turned to her and looked very intently at her.

　　"Guess," he said, with the same distorted helpless smile.

　　A shudder passed over her.

　　"But you... why do you frighten me like this?" she said, smilinglike a child.

　　"I must be a great friend of his... since I know," Raskolnikovwent on, still gazing into her face, as though he could not turn hiseyes away. "He... did not mean to kill that Lizaveta... he... killedher accidentally.... He meant to kill the old woman when she was aloneand he went there... and then Lizaveta came in... he killed her too."

　　Another awful moment passed. Both still gazed at one another.

　　"You can't guess, then?" he asked suddenly, feeling as though hewere flinging himself down from a steeple.

　　"N-no..." whispered Sonia.

　　"Take a good look."

　　As soon as he had said this again, the same familiar sensation frozehis heart. He looked at her and all at once seemed to see in herface the face of Lizaveta. He remembered clearly the expression inLizaveta's face, when he approached her with the axe and she steppedback to the wall, putting out her hand, with childish terror in herface, looking as little children do when they begin to be frightenedof something, looking intently and uneasily at what frightens them,shrinking back and holding out their little hands on the point ofcrying. Almost the same thing happened now to Sonia. With the samehelplessness and the same terror, she looked at him for a while and,suddenly putting out her left hand, pressed her fingers faintlyagainst his breast and slowly began to get up from the bed, movingfurther from him and keeping her eyes fixed even more immovably onhim. Her terror infected him. The same fear showed itself on his face.In the same way he stared at her and almost with the same childishsmile.

　　"Have you guessed?" he whispered at last.

　　"Good God!" broke in an awful wail from her bosom.

　　She sank helplessly on the bed with her face in the pillows, but amoment later she got up, moved quickly to him, seized both his handsand, gripping them tight in her thin fingers, began looking into hisface again with the same intent stare. In this last desperate look shetried to look into him and catch some last hope. But there was nohope; there was no doubt remaining; it was all true! Later on, indeed,when she recalled that moment, she thought it strange and wondered whyshe had seen at once that there was no doubt. She could not have said,for instance, that she had foreseen something of the sort- and yetnow, as soon as he told her, she suddenly fancied that she hadreally foreseen this very thing.

　　"Stop, Sonia, enough! don't torture me," he begged her miserably.

　　It was not at all, not at all like this he had thought of tellingher, but this is how it happened.

　　She jumped up, seeming not to know what she was doing, and, wringingher hands, walked into the middle of the room; but, quickly wentback and sat down again beside him, her shoulder almost touchinghis. All of a sudden she started as though she had been stabbed,uttered a cry and fell on her knees before him, she did not know why.

　　"What have you done- what have you done to yourself!" she said indespair, and, jumping up, she flung herself on his neck, threw herarms round him, and held him tight.

　　Raskolnikov drew back and looked at her with a mournful smile.

　　"You are a strange girl, Sonia- you kiss me and hug me when I tellyou about that.... You don't think what you are doing."

　　"There is no one- no one in the whole world now so unhappy asyou!" she cried in a frenzy, not hearing what he said, and shesuddenly broke into violent hysterical weeping.

　　A feeling long unfamiliar to him flooded his heart and softened itat once. He did not struggle against it. Two tears started into hiseyes and hung on his eyelashes.

　　"Then you won't leave me, Sonia?" he said, looking at her almostwith hope.

　　"No, no, never, nowhere!" cried Sonia. "I will follow you, I willfollow you everywhere. Oh, my God! Oh, how miserable I am!... Why, whydidn't I know you before! Why didn't you come before? Oh, dear!"

　　"Here I have come."

　　"Yes, now! What's to be done now!... Together, together!" sherepeated as it were unconsciously, and she hugged him again. "I'llfollow you to Siberia!"

　　He recoiled at this, and the same hostile, almost haughty smile cameto his lips.

　　"Perhaps I don't want to go to Siberia yet, Sonia," he said.

　　Sonia looked at him quickly.

　　Again after her first passionate, agonising sympathy for the unhappyman the terrible idea of the murder overwhelmed her. In his changedtone she seemed to hear the murderer speaking. She looked at himbewildered. She knew nothing as yet, why, how, with what object it hadbeen. Now all these questions rushed at once into her mind. Andagain she could not believe it: "He, he is a murderer! Could it betrue?"

　　"What's the meaning of it? Where am I?" she said in completebewilderment, as though still unable to recover herself. "How couldyou, you, a man like you.... How could you bring yourself to it?...What does it mean?"

　　"Oh, well- to plunder. Leave off, Sonia," he answered wearily,almost with vexation.

　　Sonia stood as though struck dumb, but suddenly she cried:

　　"You were hungry! It was... to help your mother? Yes?"

　　"No, Sonia, no," he muttered, turning away and hanging his head."I was not so hungry.... I certainly did want to help my mother,but... that's not the real thing either.... Don't torture me, Sonia."

　　Sonia clasped her hands.

　　"Could it, could it all be true? Good God, what a truth! Who couldbelieve it? And how could you give away your last farthing and yet roband murder! Ah," she cried suddenly, "that money you gave KaterinaIvanovna... that money.... Can that money..."

　　"No, Sonia," he broke in hurriedly, "that money was not it. Don'tworry yourself! That money my mother sent me and it came when I wasill, the day I gave it to you.... Razumihin saw it... he received itfor me.... That money was mine- my own."

　　Sonia listened to him in bewilderment and did her utmost tocomprehend.

　　"And that money.... I don't even know really whether there was anymoney," he added softly, as though reflecting. "I took a purse off herneck, made of chamois leather... a purse stuffed full ofsomething... but I didn't look in it; I suppose I hadn't time....And the things- chains and trinkets- I buried under a stone with thepurse next morning in a yard off the V__ Prospect. They are allthere now....."

　　Sonia strained every nerve to listen.

　　"Then why... why, you said you did it to rob, but you took nothing?"she asked quickly, catching at a straw.

　　"I don't know.... I haven't yet decided whether to take that moneyor not," he said, musing again; and, seeming to wake up with astart, he gave a brief ironical smile. "Ach, what silly stuff I amtalking, eh?"

　　The thought flashed through Sonia's mind, wasn't he mad? But shedismissed it at once. "No, it was something else." She could makenothing of it, nothing.

　　"Do you know, Sonia," he said suddenly with conviction, "let me tellyou: if I'd simply killed because I was hungry," laying stress onevery word and looking enigmatically but sincerely at her, "I shouldbe happy now. You must believe that! What would it matter to you,"he cried a moment later with a sort of despair, "what would itmatter to you if I were to confess that I did wrong! What do yougain by such a stupid triumph over me? Ah, Sonia, was it for that I'vecome to you to-day?"

　　Again Sonia tried to say something, but did not speak.

　　"I asked you to go with me yesterday because you are all I haveleft."

　　"Go where?" asked Sonia timidly.

　　"Not to steal and not to murder, don't be anxious," he smiledbitterly. "We are so different.... And you know, Sonia, it's only now,only this moment that I understand where I asked you to go with meyesterday! Yesterday when I said it I did not know where. I askedyou for one thing, I came to you for one thing- not to leave me. Youwon't leave me, Sonia?"

　　She squeezed his hand.

　　"And why, why did I tell her? Why did I let her know?" he cried aminute later in despair, looking with infinite anguish at her. "Hereyou expect an explanation from me, Sonia; you are sitting andwaiting for it, I see that. But what can I tell you? You won'tunderstand and will only suffer misery... on my account! Well, you arecrying and embracing me again. Why do you do it? Because I couldn'tbear my burden and have come to throw it on another: you suffer too,and I shall feel better! And can you love such a mean wretch?"

　　"But aren't you suffering, too?" cried Sonia.

　　Again a wave of the same feeling surged into his heart, and againfor an instant softened it.

　　"Sonia, I have a bad heart, take note of that. It may explain agreat deal. I have come because I am bad. There are men who wouldn'thave come. But I am a coward and... a mean wretch. But... nevermind! That's not the point. I must speak now, but I don't know howto begin."

　　He paused and sank into thought.

　　"Ach, we are so different," he cried again, "we are not alike. Andwhy, why did I come? I shall never forgive myself that."

　　"No, no, it was a good thing you came," cried Sonia. "It's betterI should know, far better!"

　　He looked at her with anguish.

　　"What if it were really that?" he said, as though reaching aconclusion. "Yes, that's what it was! I wanted to become a Napoleon,that is why I killed her.... Do you understand now?"

　　"N-no," Sonia whispered naively and timidly. "Only speak, speak, Ishall understand, I shall understand in myself!" she kept begging him.

　　"You'll understand? Very well, we shall see!" He paused and wasfor some time lost in meditation.

　　"It was like this: I asked myself one day this question- what ifNapoleon, for instance, had happened to be in my place, and if hehad not had Toulon nor Egypt nor the passage of Mont Blanc to beginhis career with, but instead of all those picturesque and monumentalthings, there had simply been some ridiculous old hag, a pawnbroker,who had to be murdered too to get money from her trunk (for hiscareer, you understand). Well, would he have brought himself tothat, if there had been no other means? Wouldn't he have felt a pangat its being so far from monumental and... and sinful, too? Well, Imust tell you that I worried myself fearfully over that 'question'so that I was awfully ashamed when I guessed at last (all of a sudden,somehow) that it would not have given him the least pang, that itwould not even have struck him that it was not monumental... that hewould not have seen that there was anything in it to pause over, andthat, if he had had no other way, he would have strangled her in aminute without thinking about it! Well, I too... left off thinkingabout it... murdered her, following his example. And that's exactlyhow it was! Do you think it funny? Yes, Sonia, the funniest thing ofall is that perhaps that's just how it was."

　　Sonia did not think it at all funny.

　　"You had better tell me straight out... without examples," shebegged, still more timidly and scarcely audibly.

　　He turned to her, looked sadly at her and took her hands.

　　"You are right again, Sonia. Of course that's all nonsense, it'salmost all talk! You see, you know of course that my mother hasscarcely anything, my sister happened to have a good education and wascondemned to drudge as a governess. All their hopes were centered onme. I was a student, but I couldn't keep myself at the universityand was forced for a time to leave it. Even if I had lingered onlike that, in ten or twelve years I might (with luck) hope to besome sort of teacher or clerk with a salary of a thousand roubles" (herepeated it as though it were a lesson) "and by that time my motherwould be worn out with grief and anxiety and I could not succeed inkeeping her in comfort while my sister... well, my sister might wellhave fared worse! And it's a hard thing to pass everything by allone's life, to turn one's back upon everything, to forget one's motherand decorously accept the insults inflicted on one's sister. Whyshould one? When one has buried them to burden oneself with others-wife and children- and to leave them again without a farthing? So Iresolved to gain possession of the old woman's money and to use it formy first years without worrying my mother, to keep myself at theuniversity and for a little while after leaving it- and to do this allon a broad, thorough scale, so as to build up a completely newcareer and enter upon a new life of independence.... Well... that'sall.... Well, of course in killing the old woman I did wrong.... Well,that's enough."

　　He struggled to the end of his speech in exhaustion and let his headsink.

　　"Oh, that's not it, that's not it," Sonia cried in distress. "Howcould one... no, that's not right, not right."

　　"You see yourself that it's not right. But I've spoken truly, it'sthe truth."

　　"As though that could be the truth! Good God!"

　　"I've only killed a louse, Sonia, a useless, loathsome, harmfulcreature."

　　"A human being- a louse!"

　　"I too know it wasn't a louse," he answered, looking strangely ather. "But I am talking nonsense, Sonia," he added. "I've beentalking nonsense a long time.... That's not it, you are right there.There were quite, quite other causes for it! I haven't talked toanyone for so long, Sonia.... My head aches dreadfully now."

　　His eyes shone with feverish brilliance. He was almost delirious; anuneasy smile strayed on his lips. His terrible exhaustion could beseen through his excitement. Sonia saw how he was suffering. She toowas growing dizzy. And he talked so strangely; it seemed somehowcomprehensible, but yet... "But how, how! Good God!" And she wrung herhands in despair.

　　"No, Sonia, that's not it," he began again suddenly, raising hishead, as though a new and sudden train of thought had struck and as itwere roused him- "that's not it! Better... imagine- yes, it'scertainly better- imagine that I am vain, envious, malicious, base,vindictive and... well, perhaps with a tendency to insanity. (Let'shave it all out at once! They've talked of madness already, Inoticed.) I told you just now I could not keep myself at theuniversity. But do you know that perhaps I might have done? Mymother would have sent me what I needed for the fees and I couldhave earned enough for clothes, boots and food, no doubt. Lessonshad turned up at half a rouble. Razumihin works! But I turned sulkyand wouldn't. (Yes, sulkiness, that's the right word for it!) I sat inmy room like a spider. You've been in my den, you've seen it.... Anddo you know, Sonia, that low ceilings and tiny rooms cramp the souland the mind? Ah, how I hated that garret! And yet I wouldn't go outof it! I wouldn't on purpose! I didn't go out for days together, and Iwouldn't work, I wouldn't even eat, I just lay there doing nothing. IfNastasya brought me anything, I ate it, if she didn't, I went allday without; I wouldn't ask, on purpose, from sulkiness! At night Ihad no light, I lay in the dark and I wouldn't earn money for candles.I ought to have studied, but I sold my books; and the dust lies aninch thick on the notebooks on my table. I preferred lying still andthinking. And I kept thinking.... And I had dreams all the time,strange dreams of all sorts, no need to describe! Only then I began tofancy that... No, that's not it! Again I am telling you wrong! You seeI kept asking myself then: why am I so stupid that if others arestupid- and I know they are- yet I won't be wiser? Then I saw,Sonia, that if one waits for every one to get wiser it will take toolong.... Afterwards I understood that that would never come to pass,that men won't change and that nobody can alter it and that it's notworth wasting effort over it. Yes, that's so. That's the law oftheir nature, Sonia,... that's so!... And I know now, Sonia, thatwhoever is strong in mind and spirit will have power over them. Anyonewho is greatly daring is right in their eyes. He who despises mostthings will be a lawgiver among them and he who dares most of all willbe most in the right! So it has been till now and so it will alwaysbe. A man must be blind not to see it!"

　　Though Raskolnikov looked at Sonia as he said this, he no longercared whether she understood or not. The fever had complete hold ofhim; he was in a sort of gloomy ecstasy (he certainly had been toolong without talking to anyone). Sonia felt that his gloomy creedhad become his faith and code.

　　"I divined then, Sonia," he went on eagerly, "that power is onlyvouchsafed to the man who dares to stoop and pick it up. There is onlyone thing, one thing needful: one has only to dare! Then for the firsttime in my life an idea took shape in my mind which no one had everthought of before me, no one! I saw clear as daylight how strange itis that not a single person living in this mad world has had thedaring to go straight for it all and send it flying to the devil! I...I wanted to have the daring... and I killed her. I only wanted to havethe daring, Sonia! That was the whole cause of it!"

　　"Oh hush, hush," cried Sonia, clasping her hands. "You turned awayfrom God and God has smitten you, has given you over to the devil!"

　　"Then Sonia, when I used to lie there in the dark and all thisbecame clear to me, was it a temptation of the devil, eh?"

　　"Hush, don't laugh, blasphemer! You don't understand, you don'tunderstand! Oh God! He won't understand!"

　　"Hush, Sonia! I am not laughing. I know myself that it was the devilleading me. Hush, Sonia, hush!" he repeated with gloomy insistence. "Iknow it all, I have thought it all over and over and whispered itall over to myself, lying there in the dark.... I've argued it allover with myself, every point of it, and I know it all, all! And howsick, how sick I was then of going over it all! I have kept wanting toforget it and make a new beginning, Sonia, and leave off thinking. Andyou don't suppose that I went into it headlong like a fool? I wentinto it like a wise man, and that was just my destruction. And youmustn't suppose that I didn't know, for instance, that if I began toquestion myself whether I had the right to gain power- I certainlyhadn't the right- or that if I asked myself whether a human being is alouse it proved that it wasn't so for me, though it might be for a manwho would go straight to his goal without asking questions.... If Iworried myself all those days, wondering whether Napoleon would havedone it or not, I felt clearly of course that I wasn't Napoleon. I hadto endure all the agony of that battle of ideas, Sonia, and I longedto throw it off: I wanted to murder without casuistry, to murder formy own sake, for myself alone! I didn't want to lie about it even tomyself. It wasn't to help my mother I did the murder- that's nonsense-I didn't do the murder to gain wealth and power and to become abenefactor of mankind. Nonsense! I simply did it; I did the murder formyself, for myself alone, and whether I became a benefactor to others,or spent my life like a spider catching men in my web and suckingthe life out of men, I couldn't have cared at that moment.... And itwas not the money I wanted, Sonia, when I did it. It was not so muchthe money I wanted, but something else.... I know it all now....Understand me! Perhaps I should never have committed a murder again. Iwanted to find out something else; it was something else led me on.I wanted to find out then and quickly whether I was a louse likeeverybody else or a man. Whether I can step over barriers or not,whether I dare stoop to pick up or not, whether I am a tremblingcreature or whether I have the right..."

　　"To kill? Have the right to kill?" Sonia clasped her hands.

　　"Ach, Sonia!" he cried irritably and seemed about to make someretort, but was contemptuously silent. "Don't interrupt me, Sonia. Iwant to prove one thing only, that the devil led me on then and he hasshown me since that I had not the right to take that path, because Iam just such a louse as all the rest. He was mocking me and hereI've come to you now! Welcome your guest! If I were not a louse,should I have come to you? Listen: when I went then to the old woman'sI only went to try.... You may be sure of that!"

　　"And you murdered her!"

　　"But how did I murder her? Is that how men do murders? Do men goto commit a murder as I went then? I will tell you some day how Iwent! Did I murder the old woman? I murdered myself, not her! Icrushed myself once for all, for ever.... But it was the devil thatkilled that old woman, not I. Enough, enough, Sonia, enough! Let mebe!" he cried in a sudden spasm of agony, "let me be!"

　　He leaned his elbows on his knees and squeezed his head in his handsas in a vise.

　　"What suffering!" A wail of anguish broke from Sonia.

　　"Well, what am I to do now?" he asked, suddenly raising his head andlooking at her with a face hideously distorted by despair.

　　"What are you to do?" she cried, jumping up, and her eyes that hadbeen full of tears suddenly began to shine. "Stand up!" (She seizedhim by the shoulder, he got up, looking at her almost bewildered.) "Goat once, this very minute, stand at the cross-roads, bow down, firstkiss the earth which you have defiled and then bow down to all theworld and say to all men aloud, 'I am a murderer!' Then God willsend you life again. Will you go, will you go?" she asked him,trembling all over, snatching his two hands, squeezing them tight inhers and gazing at him with eyes full of fire.

　　He was amazed at her sudden ecstasy.

　　"You mean Siberia, Sonia? I must give myself up?" he asked gloomily.

　　"Suffer and expiate your sin by it, that's what you must do."

　　"No! I am not going to them, Sonia!"

　　"But how will you go on living? What will you live for?" criedSonia, "how is it possible now? Why, how can you talk to yourmother? (Oh, what will become of them now!) But what am I saying?You have abandoned your mother and your sister already. He hasabandoned them already! Oh, God!" she cried, "why, he knows it allhimself. How, how can he live by himself! What will become of younow?"

　　"Don't be a child, Sonia," he said softly. "What wrong have I donethem? Why should I go to them? What should I say to them? That'sonly a phantom.... They destroy men by millions themselves and look onit as a virtue. They are knaves and scoundrels, Sonia! I am notgoing to them. And what should I say to them- that I murdered her, butdid not dare to take the money and hid it under a stone?" he addedwith a bitter smile. "Why, they would laugh at me, and would call me afool for not getting it. A coward and a fool! They wouldn't understandand they don't deserve to understand. Why should I go to them? Iwon't. Don't be a child, Sonia...."

　　"It will be too much for you to bear, too much!" she repeated,holding out her hands in despairing supplication.

　　"Perhaps I've been unfair to myself," he observed gloomily,pondering, "perhaps after all I am a man and not a louse and I've beenin too great a hurry to condemn myself. I'll make another fight forit."

　　A haughty smile appeared on his lips.

　　"What a burden to bear! And your whole life, your whole life!"

　　"I shall get used to it," he said grimly and thoughtfully. "Listen,"he began a minute later, "stop crying, it's time to talk of the facts:I've come to tell you that the police are after me, on my track...."

　　"Ach!" Sonia cried in terror.

　　"Well, why do you cry out? You want me to go to Siberia and nowyou are frightened? But let me tell you: I shall not give myself up. Ishall make a struggle for it and they won't do anything to me. They'veno real evidence. Yesterday I was in great danger and believed I waslost; but to-day things are going better. All the facts they knowcan be explained two ways, that's to say I can turn theiraccusations to my credit, do you understand? And I shall, for I'velearnt my lesson. But they will certainly arrest me. If it had notbeen for something that happened, they would have done so to-day forcertain; perhaps even now they will arrest me to-day.... But that's nomatter, Sonia; they'll let me out again... for there isn't any realproof against me, and there won't be, I give you my word for it. Andthey can't convict a man on what they have against me. Enough.... Ionly tell you that you may know.... I will try to manage somehow toput it to my mother and sister so that they won't be frightened.... Mysister's future is secure, however, now, I believe... and mymother's must be too.... Well, that's all. Be careful, though. Willyou come and see me in prison when I am there?"

　　"Oh, I will, I will."

　　They sat side by side, both mournful and dejected, as though theyhad been cast up by the tempest alone on some deserted shore. Helooked at Sonia and felt how great was her love for him, and strangeto say he felt it suddenly burdensome and painful to be so loved. Yes,it was a strange and awful sensation! On his way to see Sonia he hadfelt that all his hopes rested on her; he expected to be rid of atleast part of his suffering, and now, when all her heart turnedtowards him, he suddenly felt that he was immeasurably unhappierthan before.

　　"Sonia," he said, "you'd better not come and see me when I am inprison."

　　Sonia did not answer, she was crying. Several minutes passed.

　　"Have you a cross on you?" she asked, as though suddenly thinking ofit.

　　He did not at first understand the question.

　　"No, of course not. Here, take this one, of cypress wood. I haveanother, a copper one that belonged to Lizaveta. I changed withLizaveta: she gave me her cross and I gave her my little ikon. Iwill wear Lizaveta's now and give you this. Take it... it's mine! It'smine, you know," she begged him. "We will go to suffer together, andtogether we will bear our cross!"

　　"Give it me," said Raskolnikov.

　　He did not want to hurt her feelings. But immediately he drew backthe hand he held out for the cross.

　　"Not now, Sonia. Better later," he added to comfort her.

　　"Yes, yes, better," she repeated with conviction, "when you go tomeet your suffering, then put it on. You will come to me, I'll putit on you, we will pray and go together."

　　At that moment some one knocked three times at the door.

　　"Sofya Semyonovna, may I come in?" they heard in a very familiar andpolite voice.

　　Sonia rushed to the door in a fright. The flaxen head of Mr.Lebeziatnikov appeared at the door.

　　Chapter Five

　　LEBEZIATNIKOV looked perturbed.

　　"I've come to you, Sofya Semyonovna," he began. "Excuse me... Ithought I should find you," he said, addressing Raskolnikovsuddenly, "that is, I didn't mean anything... of that sort... But Ijust thought... Katerina Ivanovna has gone out of her mind," heblurted out suddenly, turning from Raskolnikov to Sonia.

　　Sonia screamed.

　　"At least it seems so. But... we don't know what to do, you see! Shecame back- she seems to have been turned out somewhere, perhapsbeaten.... So it seems at least,... She had run to your father'sformer chief, she didn't find him at home: he was dining at some othergeneral's.... Only fancy, she rushed off there, to the othergeneral's, and, imagine, she was so persistent that she managed to getthe chief to see her, had him fetched out from dinner, it seems. Youcan imagine what happened. She was turned out, of course; but,according to her own story, she abused him and threw something at him.One may well believe it.... How it is she wasn't taken up, I can'tunderstand! Now she is telling every one, including Amalia Ivanovna;but it's difficult to understand her, she is screaming and flingingherself about.... Oh yes, she shouts that since every one hasabandoned her, she will take the children and go into the streetwith a barrel-organ, and the children will sing and dance, and shetoo, and collect money, and will go every day under the general'swindow... 'to let every one see well-born children, whose father wasan official, begging in the street.' She keeps beating the childrenand they are all crying. She is teaching Lida to sing 'My Village,'the boy to dance, Polenka the same. She is tearing up all the clothes,and making them little caps like actors; she means to carry a tinbasin and make it tinkle, instead of music.... She won't listen toanything.... Imagine the state of things! It's beyond anything!"

　　Lebeziatnikov would have gone on, but Sonia, who had heard himalmost breathless, snatched up her cloak and hat, and ran out of theroom, putting on her things as she went. Raskolnikov followed herand Lebeziatnikov came after him.

　　"She has certainly gone mad!" he said to Raskolnikov, as they wentout into the street. "I didn't want to frighten Sofya Semyonovna, so Isaid 'it seemed like it,' but there isn't a doubt of it. They say thatin consumption, the tubercles sometimes occur in the brain; it's apity I know nothing of medicine. I did try to persuade her, but shewouldn't listen."

　　"Did you talk to her about the tubercles?"

　　"Not precisely of the tubercles. Besides, she wouldn't haveunderstood! But what I say is, that if you convince a person logicallythat he has nothing to cry about, he'll stop crying. That's clear.Is it your conviction that he won't?"

　　"Life would be too easy if it were so," answered Raskolnikov.

　　"Excuse me, excuse me; of course it would be rather difficult forKaterina Ivanovna to understand, but do you know that in Paris theyhave been conducting serious experiments as to the possibility ofcuring the insane, simply by logical argument? One professor there,a scientific man of standing, lately dead, believed in the possibilityof such treatment. His idea was that there's nothing really wrong withthe physical organism of the insane, and that insanity is, so tosay, a logical mistake, an error of judgment, an incorrect view ofthings. He gradually showed the madman his error and, would youbelieve it, they say he was successful? But as he made use ofdouches too, how far success was due to that treatment remainsuncertain.... So it seems at least."

　　Raskolnikov had long ceased to listen. Reaching the house where helived, he nodded to Lebeziatnikov and went in at the gate.Lebeziatnikov woke up with a start, looked about him and hurried on.

　　Raskolnikov went into his little room and stood still in themiddle of it. Why had he come back here? He looked at the yellow andtattered paper, at the dust, at his sofa.... From the yard came a loudcontinuous knocking; some one seemed to be hammering... He went to thewindow, rose on tiptoe and looked out into the yard for a long timewith an air of absorbed attention. But the yard was empty and he couldnot see who was hammering. In the house on the left he saw some openwindows; on the window-sills were pots of sickly-looking geraniums.Linen was hung out of the windows... He knew it all by heart. Heturned away and sat down on the sofa.

　　Never, never had he felt himself so fearfully alone!

　　Yes, he felt once more that he would perhaps come to hate Sonia, nowthat he had made her more miserable.

　　"Why had he gone to her to beg for her tears? What need had he topoison her life? Oh, the meanness of it!"

　　"I will remain alone," he said resolutely, "and she shall not cometo the prison!"

　　Five minutes later he raised his head with a strange smile. That wasa strange thought.

　　"Perhaps it really would be better in Siberia," he thought suddenly.

　　He could not have said how long he sat there with vague thoughtssurging through his mind. All at once the door opened and Douniacame in. At first she stood still and looked at him from thedoorway, just as he had done at Sonia; then she came in and sat downin the same place as yesterday, on the chair facing him. He lookedsilently and almost vacantly at her.

　　"Don't be angry, brother; I've only come for one minute," saidDounia.

　　Her face looked thoughtful but not stern. Her eyes were bright andsoft. He saw that she too had come to him with love.

　　"Brother, now I know all, all. Dmitri Prokofitch has explained andtold me everything. They are worrying and persecuting you through astupid and contemptible suspicion.... Dmitri Prokofitch told me thatthere is no danger, and that you are wrong in looking upon it withsuch horror. I don't think so, and I fully understand how indignantyou must be, and that that indignation may have a permanent effecton you. That's what I am afraid of. As for your cutting yourself offfrom us, I don't judge you, I don't venture to judge you, andforgive me for having blamed you for it. I feel that I too, if I hadso great a trouble, should keep away from every one. I shall tellmother nothing of this, but I shall talk about you continually andshall tell her from you that you will come very soon. Don't worryabout her; I will set her mind at rest; but don't you try her toomuch- come once at least; remember that she is your mother. And nowI have come simply to say" (Dounia began to get up) "that if youshould need me or should need... all my life or anything... call me,and I'll come. Good-bye!"

　　She turned abruptly and went towards the door.

　　"Dounia!" Raskolnikov stopped her and went towards her. "ThatRazumihin, Dmitri Prokofitch, is a very good fellow."

　　Dounia flushed slightly.

　　"Well?" she asked, waiting a moment.

　　"He is competent, hardworking, honest and capable of real love....Good-bye, Dounia."

　　Dounia flushed crimson, then suddenly she took alarm.

　　"But what does it mean, brother? Are we really parting for ever thatyou... give me such a parting message?"

　　"Never mind.... Good-bye."

　　He turned away, and walked to the window. She stood a moment, lookedat him uneasily, and went out troubled.

　　No, he was not cold to her. There was an instant (the very last one)when he had longed to take her in his arms and say good-bye to her,and even to tell her, but he had not dared even to touch her hand.

　　"Afterwards she may shudder when she remembers that I embracedher, and will feel that I stole her kiss."

　　"And would she stand that test?" he went on a few minutes later tohimself. "No, she wouldn't; girls like that can't stand things! Theynever do."

　　And he thought of Sonia.

　　There was a breath of fresh air from the window. The daylight wasfading. He took up his cap and went out.

　　He could not, of course, and would not consider how ill he was.But all this continual anxiety and agony of mind could not butaffect him. And if he were not lying in high fever it was perhaps justbecause this continual inner strain helped to keep him on his legs andin possession of his faculties. But this artificial excitement couldnot last long.

　　He wandered aimlessly. The sun was setting. A special form of miseryhad begun to oppress him of late. There was nothing poignant,nothing acute about it; but there was a feeling of permanence, ofeternity about it; it brought a foretaste of hopeless years of thiscold leaden misery, a foretaste of an eternity "on a square yard ofspace." Towards evening this sensation usually began to weigh on himmore heavily.

　　"With this idiotic, purely physical weakness, depending on thesunset or something, one can't help doing something stupid! You'llgo to Dounia, as well as to Sonia," he muttered bitterly.

　　He heard his name called. He looked round. Lebeziatnikov rushed upto him.

　　"Only fancy, I've been to your room looking for you. Only fancy,she's carried out her plan, and taken away the children. SofyaSemyonovna and I have had a job to find them. She is rapping on afrying-pan and making the children dance. The children are crying.They keep stopping at the cross roads and in front of shops; there's acrowd of fools running after them. Come along!"

　　"And Sonia?" Raskolnikov asked anxiously, hurrying afterLebeziatnikov.

　　"Simply frantic. That is, it's not Sofya Semyonovna's frantic, butKaterina Ivanovna, though Sofya Semyonova's frantic too. ButKaterina Ivanovna is absolutely frantic. I tell you she is quitemad. They'll be taken to the police. You can fancy what an effect thatwill have.... They are on the canal bank, near the bridge now, not farfrom Sofya Semyonovna's, quite close."

　　On the canal bank near the bridge and not two houses away from theone where Sonia lodged, there was a crowd of people, consistingprincipally of gutter children. The hoarse broken voice of KaterinaIvanovna could be heard from the bridge, and it certainly was astrange spectacle likely to attract a street crowd. KaterinaIvanovna in her old dress with the green shawl, wearing a torn strawhat, crushed in a hideous way on one side, was really frantic. She wasexhausted and breathless. Her wasted consumptive face looked moresuffering than ever, and indeed out of doors in the sunshine aconsumptive always looks worse than at home. But her excitement didnot flag, and every moment her irritation grew more intense. Sherushed at the children, shouted at them, coaxed them, told them beforethe crowd how to dance and what to sing, began explaining to themwhy it was necessary, and driven to desperation by their notunderstanding, beat them.... Then she would make a rush at thecrowd; if she noticed any decently dressed person stopping to look,she immediately appealed to him to see what these children "from agenteel, one may say aristocratic, house" had been brought to. Ifshe heard laughter or jeering in the crowd, she would rush at onceat the scoffers and begin squabbling with them. Some people laughed,others shook their heads, but every one felt curious at the sight ofthe madwoman with the frightened children. The frying-pan of whichLebeziatnikov had spoken was not there, at least Raskolnikov did notsee it. But instead of rapping on the pan, Katerina Ivanovna beganclapping her wasted hands, when she made Lida and Kolya dance andPolenka sing. She too joined in the singing, but broke down at thesecond note with a fearful cough, which made her curse in despairand even shed tears. What made her most furious was the weeping andterror of Kolya and Lida. Some effort had been made to dress thechildren up as street singers are dressed. The boy had on a turbanmade of something red and white to look like a Turk. There had been nocostume for Lida; she simply had a red knitted cap, or rather anight cap that had belonged to Marmeladov, decorated with a brokenpiece of white ostrich feather, which had been Katerina Ivanovna'sgrandmother's and had been preserved as a family possession. Polenkawas in her everyday dress; she looked in timid perplexity at hermother, and kept at her side, hiding her tears. She dimly realised hermother's condition, and looked uneasily about her. She was terriblyfrightened of the street and the crowd. Sonia followed KaterinaIvanovna, weeping and beseeching her to return home, but KaterinaIvanovna was not to be persuaded.

　　"Leave off, Sonia, leave off," she shouted, speaking fast, pantingand coughing. "You don't know what you ask; you are like a child! I'vetold you before that I am not coming back to that drunken German.Let every one, let all Petersburg see the children begging in thestreets, though their father was an honourable man who served allhis life in truth and fidelity, and one may say died in theservice." (Katerina Ivanovna had by now invented this fantasticstory and thoroughly believed it.) "Let that wretch of a general seeit! And you are silly, Sonia: what have we to eat? Tell me that. Wehave worried you enough, I won't go on so! Ah, Rodion Romanovitch,is that you?" she cried, seeing Raskolnikov and rushing up to him."Explain to this silly girl, please, that nothing better could bedone! Even organ-grinders earn their living, and every one will see atonce that we are different, that we are an honourable and bereavedfamily reduced to beggary. And that general will lose his post, you'llsee! We shall perform under his windows every day, and if the Tsardrives by, I'll fall on my knees, put the children before me, showthem to him, and say 'Defend us, father.' He is the father of thefatherless, he is merciful, he'll protect us, you'll see, and thatwretch of a general.... Lida, tenez vous droite! Kolya, you'll danceagain. Why are you whimpering? Whimpering again! What are you afraidof, stupid? Goodness, what am I to do with them, Rodion Romanovitch?If you only knew how stupid they are! What's one to do with suchchildren?"

　　And she, almost crying herself- which did not stop heruninterrupted, rapid flow of talk- pointed to the crying children.Raskolnikov tried to persuade her to go home, and even said, hoping towork on her vanity, that it was unseemly for her to be wandering aboutthe streets like an organ-grinder, as she was intending to becomethe principal of a boarding-school.

　　"A boarding-school, ha-ha-ha! A castle in the air," cried KaterinaIvanovna, her laugh ending in a cough. "No, Rodion Romanovitch, thatdream is over! All have forsaken us!... And that general.... You know,Rodion Romanovitch, I threw an inkspot at him- it happened to bestanding in the waiting-room by the paper where you sign your name.I wrote my name, threw it at him and ran away. Oh the scoundrels,the scoundrels! But enough of them, now I'll provide for thechildren myself, I won't bow down to anybody! She has had to bearenough for us!" she pointed to Sonia. "Polenka, how much have you got?Show me! What, only two farthings! Oh, the mean wretches! They give usnothing, only run after us, putting their tongues out. There, whatis that blockhead laughing at?" (She pointed to a man in the crowd.)"It's all because Kolya here is so stupid; I have such a bother withhim. What do you want, Polenka? Tell me in French, parlez moifrancais. Why, I've taught you, you know some phrases. Else how areyou to show that you are of good family, well brought-up children, andnot at all like other organ-grinders? We aren't going to have aPunch and Judy show in the street, but to sing a genteel song....Ah, yes,... What are we to sing? You keep putting me out, but we...you see, we are standing here, Rodion Romanovitch, to find somethingto sing and get money, something Kolya can dance to.... For, as youcan fancy, our performance is all impromptu.... We must talk it overand rehearse it all thoroughly, and then we shall go to Nevsky,where there are far more people of good society, and we shall benoticed at once. Lida knows 'My Village' only, nothing but 'MyVillage,' and every one sings that. We must sing something far moregenteel.... Well, have you thought of anything, Polenka? If only you'dhelp your mother! My memory's quite gone, or I should have thoughtof something. We really can't sing 'An Hussar.' Ah, let us sing inFrench, 'Cinq sous,' I have taught it you, I have taught it you. Andas it is in French, people will see at once that you are children ofgood family, and that will be much more touching.... You might sing'Marlborough s'en va-t-en guerre,' for that's quite a child's song andis sung as a lullaby in all the aristocratic houses.-

　　Marlborough s'en va-t-en guerre

　　Ne sait quand reviendra...-

　　she began singing. "But no, better sing 'Cinq sous.' Now, Kolya,your hands on your hips, make haste, and you, Lida, keep turning theother way, and Polenka and I will sing and clap our hands!-

　　Cinq sous, cinq sous

　　Pour monter notre menage.-

　　(Cough-cough-cough!) Set your dress straight, Polenka, it'sslipped down on your shoulders," she observed, panting fromcoughing. "Now it's particularly necessary to behave nicely andgenteelly, that all may see that you are well-born children. I said atthe time that the bodice should be cut longer, and made of two widths.It was your fault, Sonia, with your advice to make it shorter, and nowyou see the child is quite deformed by it.... Why, you're all cryingagain! What's the matter, stupids? Come, Kolya, begin. Make haste,make haste! Oh, what an unbearable child!-

　　Cinq sous, cinq sous.-

　　A policeman again! What do you want?"

　　A policeman was indeed forcing his way through the crowd. But atthat moment a gentleman in civilian uniform and an overcoat- asolid-looking official of about fifty with a decoration on his neck(which delighted Katerina Ivanovna and had its effect on thepoliceman)- approached and without a word handed her a greenthree-rouble note. His face wore a look of genuine sympathy.Katerina Ivanovna took it and gave him a polite, even ceremonious,bow.

　　"I thank you, honoured sir," she began loftily. "The causes thathave induced us (take the money, Polenka: you see there are generousand honourable people who are ready to help a poor gentlewoman indistress). You see, honoured sir, these orphans of good family- Imight even say of aristocratic connections- and that wretch of ageneral sat eating grouse... and stamped at my disturbing him. 'Yourexcellency,' I said, 'protect the orphans, for you knew my latehusband, Semyon Zaharovitch, and on the very day of his death thebasest of scoundrels slandered his only daughter.'... That policemanagain! Protect me," she cried to the official. "Why is thatpoliceman edging up to me? We have only just run away from one ofthem. What do you want, fool?"

　　"It's forbidden in the streets. You mustn't make a disturbance."

　　"It's you're making a disturbance. It's just the same as if I weregrinding an organ. What business is it of yours?"

　　"You have to get a licence for an organ, and you haven't got one,and in that way you collect a crowd. Where do you lodge?"

　　"What, a license?" wailed Katerina Ivanovna. "I buried my husbandto-day. What need of a license?"

　　"Calm yourself, madam, calm yourself," began the official. "Comealong; I will escort you.... This is no place for you in the crowd.You are ill."

　　"Honoured sir, honoured sir, you don't know," screamed KaterinaIvanovna. "We are going to the Nevsky.... Sonia, Sonia! Where isshe? She is crying too! What's the matter with you all? Kolya, Lida,where are you going?" she cried suddenly in alarm. "Oh, sillychildren! Kolya, Lida, where are they off to?..."

　　Kolya and Lida, scared out of their wits by the crowd, and theirmother's mad pranks, suddenly seized each other by the hand, and ranoff at the sight of the policeman who wanted to take them awaysomewhere. Weeping and wailing, poor Katerina Ivanovna ran after them.She was a piteous and unseemly spectacle, as she ran, weeping andpanting for breath. Sonia and Polenka rushed after them.

　　"Bring them back, bring them back, Sonia! Oh stupid, ungratefulchildren!... Polenka! catch them.... It's for your sakes I..."

　　She stumbled as she ran and fell down.

　　"She's cut herself, she's bleeding! Oh, dear!" cried Sonia,bending over her.

　　All ran up and crowded round. Raskolnikov and Lebeziatnikov were thefirst at her side, the official too hastened up, and behind him thepoliceman who muttered, "Bother!" with a gesture of impatience,feeling that the job was going to be a troublesome one.

　　"Pass on! Pass on!" he said to the crowd that pressed forward.

　　"She's dying," some one shouted.

　　"She's gone out of her mind," said another.

　　"Lord have mercy upon us," said a woman, crossing herself. "Havethey caught the little girl and the boy? They're being brought back,the elder one's got them.... Ah, the naughty imps!"

　　When they examined Katerina Ivanovna carefully, they saw that shehad not cut herself against a stone, as Sonia thought, but that theblood that stained the pavement red was from her chest.

　　"I've seen that before," muttered the official to Raskolnikov andLebeziatnikov; "that's consumption; the blood flows and chokes thepatient. I saw the same thing with a relative of my own not longago... nearly a pint of blood, all in a minute.... What's to be donethough? She is dying."

　　"This way, this way, to my room!" Sonia implored. "I live here!...See, that house, the second from here.... Come to me, make haste," sheturned from one to the other. "Send for the doctor! Oh, dear!"

　　Thanks to the official's efforts, this plan was adopted, thepoliceman even helping to carry Katerina Ivanovna. She was carriedto Sonia's room, almost unconscious, and laid on the bed. The bloodwas still flowing, but she seemed to be coming to herself.Raskolnikov, Lebeziatnikov, and the official accompanied Sonia intothe room and were followed by the policeman, who first drove backthe crowd which followed to the very door. Polenka came in holdingKolya and Lida, who were trembling and weeping. Several persons camein too from the Kapernaumovs' room; the landlord, a lame one-eyedman of strange appearance with whiskers and hair that stood up likea brush, his wife, a woman with an everlastingly scared expression,and several open-mouthed children with wonder-struck faces. Amongthese, Svidrigailov suddenly made his appearance. Raskolnikov lookedat him with surprise, not understanding where he had come from and nothaving noticed him in the crowd. A doctor and priest wore spoken of.The official whispered to Raskolnikov that he thought it was toolate now for the doctor, but he ordered him to be sent for.Kapernaumov ran himself.

　　Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna had regained her breath. The bleedingceased for a time. She looked with sick but intent and penetratingeyes at Sonia, who stood pale and trembling, wiping the sweat from herbrow with a handkerchief. At last she asked to be raised. They sat herup on the bed, supporting her on both sides.

　　"Where are the children?" she said in a faint voice. "You've broughtthem, Polenka? Oh the sillies! Why did you run away.... Och!"

　　Once more her parched lips were covered with blood. She moved hereyes, looking about her.

　　"So that's how you live, Sonia! Never once have I been in yourroom."

　　She looked at her with a face of suffering.

　　"We have been your ruin, Sonia. Polenka, Lida, Kolya, come here!Well, here they are, Sonia, take them all! I hand them over to you,I've had enough! The ball is over. (Cough!) Lay me down, let me die inpeace."

　　They laid her back on the pillow.

　　"What, the priest? I don't want him. You haven't got a rouble tospare. I have no sins. God must forgive me without that. He knowshow I have suffered.... And if He won't forgive me, I don't care!"

　　She sank more and more into uneasy delirium. At times she shuddered,turned her eyes from side to side, recognised every one for aminute, but at once sank into delirium again. Her breathing was hoarseand difficult, there was a sort of rattle in her throat.

　　"I said to him, your excellency," she ejaculated, gasping after eachword. "That Amalia Ludwigovna, ah! Lida, Kolya, hands on your hips,make haste! Glissez, glissez! pas de basque! Tap with your heels, be agraceful child!-

　　Du hast Diamanten und Perlen-

　　What next? That's the thing to sing.-

　　Du hast die schonsten Augen

　　Madchen, was willst du mehr?-

　　"What an idea! Was willst du mehr. What things the fool invents! Ah,yes!-

　　In the heat of midday in the vale of Dagestan.-

　　"Ah, how I loved it! I loved that song to distraction, Polenka! Yourfather, you know, used to sing it when we were engaged.... Oh thosedays! Oh that's the thing for us to sing! How does it go? I'veforgotten. Remind me! How was it?"

　　She was violently excited and tried to sit up. At last, in ahorribly hoarse, broken voice, she began, shrieking and gasping atevery word, with a look of growing terror.

　　"In the heat of midday!... in the vale!... of Dagestan!... With leadin my breast!..."

　　"Your excellency!" she wailed suddenly with a heartrending screamand a flood of tears, "protect the orphans! You have been theirfather's guest... one may say aristocratic...." She started, regainingconsciousness, and gazed at all with a sort of terror, but at oncerecognised Sonia.

　　"Sonia, Sonia!" she articulated softly and caressingly, as thoughsurprised to find her there. "Sonia darling, are you here, too?"

　　They lifted her up again.

　　"Enough! It's over! Farewell, poor thing! I am done for! I ambroken!" she cried with vindictive despair, and her head fellheavily back on the pillow.

　　She sank into unconsciousness again, but this time it did not lastlong. Her pale, yellow, wasted face dropped back, her mouth fell open,her leg moved convulsively, she gave a deep, deep sigh and died.

　　Sonia fell upon her, flung her arms about her, and remainedmotionless with her head pressed to the dead woman's wasted bosom.Polenka threw herself at her mother's feet, kissing them and weepingviolently. Though Kolya and Lida did not understand what had happened,they had a feeling that it was something terrible; they put theirhands on each other's little shoulders, stared straight at one anotherand both at once opened their mouths and began screaming. They wereboth still in their fancy dress; one in a turban, the other in the capwith the ostrich feather.

　　And how did "the certificate of merit" come to be on the bedbeside Katerina Ivanovna? It lay there by the pillow: Raskolnikovsaw it.

　　He walked away to the window. Lebeziatnikov skipped up to him.

　　"She is dead," he said.

　　"Rodion Romanovitch, I must have two words with you," saidSvidrigailov, coming up to them.

　　Lebeziatnikov at once made room for him and delicately withdrew.Svidrigailov drew Raskolnikov further away.

　　"I will undertake all the arrangements, the funeral and that. Youknow it's a question of money and, as I told you, I have plenty tospare. I will put those two little ones and Polenka into some goodorphan asylum, and I will settle fifteen hundred roubles to be paid toeach on coming of age, so that Sofya Semyonovna need have no anxietyabout them. And I will pull her out of the mud too, for she is agood girl, isn't she? So tell Avdotya Romanovna that that is how Iam spending her ten thousand."

　　"What is your motive for such benevolence?" asked Raskolnikov.

　　"Ah! you sceptical person!" laughed Svidrigailov. "I told you Ihad no need of that money. Won't you admit that it's simply donefrom humanity? She wasn't 'a louse,' you know" (he pointed to thecorner where the dead woman lay), "was she, like some old pawnbrokerwoman? Come, you'll agree, is Luzhin to go on living, and doing wickedthings or is she to die? And if I didn't help them, Polenka would gothe same way."

　　He said this with an air of a sort of gay winking slyness, keepinghis eyes fixed on Raskolnikov, who turned white and cold, hearinghis own phrases, spoken to Sonia. He quickly stepped back and lookedwildly at Svidrigailov.

　　"How do you know?" he whispered, hardly able to breathe.

　　"Why, I lodge here at Madame Resslich's, the other side of the wall.Here is Kapernaumov, and there lives Madame Resslich, an old anddevoted friend of mine. I am a neighbour."

　　"You?"

　　"Yes," continued Svidrigailov, shaking with laughter. "I assureyou on my honour, dear Rodion Romanovitch, that you have interested meenormously. I told you we should become friends, I foretold it.Well, here we have. And you will see what an accommodating person Iam. You'll see that you can get on with me!"

　　PART FIVE

　　Chapter One

　　THE MORNING that followed the fateful interview with Dounia andher mother brought sobering influences to bear on Pyotr Petrovitch.Intensely unpleasant as it was, he was forced little by little toaccept as a fact beyond recall what had seemed to him only the daybefore fantastic and incredible. The black snake of wounded vanity hadbeen gnawing at his heart all night. When he got out of bed, PyotrPetrovitch immediately looked in the looking-glass. He was afraid thathe had jaundice. However his health seemed unimpaired so far, andlooking at his noble, clear-skinned countenance which had grownfattish of late, Pyotr Petrovitch for an instant was positivelycomforted in the conviction that he would find another bride and,perhaps, even a better one. But coming back to the sense of hispresent position, he turned aside and spat vigorously, which excited asarcastic smile in Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov, the young friendwith whom he was staying. That smile Pyotr Petrovitch noticed, andat once set it down against his young friend's account. He had setdown a good many points against him of late. His anger was redoubledwhen he reflected that he ought not to have told Andrey Semyonovitchabout the result of yesterday's interview. That was the second mistakehe had made in temper, through impulsiveness and irritability....Moreover, all that morning one unpleasantness followed another. Heeven found a hitch awaiting him in his legal case in the Senate. Hewas particularly irritated by the owner of the flat which had beentaken in view of his approaching marriage and was being redecorated athis own expense; the owner, a rich German tradesman, would notentertain the idea of breaking the contract which had just been signedand insisted on the full forfeit money, though Pyotr Petrovitchwould be giving him back the flat practically redecorated. In the sameway the upholsterers refused to return a single rouble of theinstalment paid for the furniture purchased but not yet removed to theflat.

　　"Am I to get married simply for the sake of the furniture?" PyotrPetrovitch ground his teeth and at the same time once more he had agleam of desperate hope. "Can all that be really so irrevocablyover? Is it no use to make another effort?" The thought of Dounia senta voluptuous pang through his heart. He endured anguish at thatmoment, and if it had been possible to slay Raskolnikov instantly bywishing it, Pyotr Petrovitch would promptly have uttered the wish.

　　"It was my mistake, too, not to have given them money," hethought, as he returned dejectedly to Lebeziatnikov's room, "and whyon earth was I such a Jew? It was false economy! I meant to keepthem without a penny so that they should turn to me as theirprovidence, and look at them! Foo! If I'd spent some fifteen hundredroubles on them for the trousseau and presents, on knick-knacks,dressing-cases, jewellery, materials, and all that sort of trashfrom Knopp's and the English shop, my position would have beenbetter and... stronger! They could not have refused me so easily! Theyare the sort of people that would feel bound to return money andpresents if they broke it off; and they would find it hard to do it!And their consciences would prick them: how can we dismiss a man whohas hitherto been so generous and delicate?.... H'm! I've made ablunder."

　　And grinding his teeth again, Pyotr Petrovitch called himself afool- but not aloud, of course.

　　He returned home, twice as irritated and angry as before. Thepreparations for the funeral dinner at Katerina Ivanovna's excited hiscuriosity as he passed. He had heard about it the day before; hefancied, indeed, that he had been invited, but absorbed in his owncares he had paid no attention. Inquiring of Madame Lippevechsel whowas busy laying the table while Katerina Ivanovna was away at thecemetery, he heard that the entertainment was to be a great affair,that all the lodgers had been invited, among them some who had notknown the dead man, that even Andrey Semyonovitch Lebeziatnikov wasinvited in spite of his previous quarrel with Katerina Ivanovna,that he, Pyotr Petrovitch, was not only invited, but was eagerlyexpected as he was the most important of the lodgers. AmaliaIvanovna herself had been invited with great ceremony in spite ofthe recent unpleasantness, and so she was very busy withpreparations and was taking a positive pleasure in them; she wasmoreover dressed up to the nines, all in new black silk, and she wasproud of it. All this suggested an idea to Pyotr Petrovitch and hewent into his room, or rather Lebeziatnikov's, somewhat thoughtful. Hehad learnt that Raskolnikov was to be one of the guests.

　　Andrey Semyonovitch had been at home all the morning. The attitudeof Pyotr Petrovitch to this gentleman was strange, though perhapsnatural. Pyotr Petrovitch had despised and hated him from the day hecame to stay with him and at the same time he seemed somewhat afraidof him. He had not come to stay with him on his arrival inPetersburg simply from parsimony, though that had been perhaps hischief object. He had heard of Andrey Semyonovitch, who had once beenhis ward, as a leading young progressive who was taking an importantpart in certain interesting circles, the doings of which were a legendin the provinces. It had impressed Pyotr Petrovitch. These powerfulomniscient circles who despised every one and showed every one uphad long inspired in him a peculiar but quite vague alarm. He had not,of course, been able to form even an approximate notion of what theymeant. He, like every one, had heard that there were, especially inPetersburg, progressives of some sort, nihilists and so on, and,like many people, he exaggerated and distorted the significance ofthose words to an absurd degree. What for many years past he hadfeared more than anything was being shown up and this was the chiefground for his continual uneasiness at the thought of transferring hisbusiness to Petersburg. He was afraid of this as little children aresometimes panic-stricken. Some years before, when he was just enteringon his own career, he had come upon two cases in which ratherimportant personages in the province, patrons of his, had been cruellyshown up. One instance had ended in great scandal for the personattacked and the other had very nearly ended in serious trouble. Forthis reason Pyotr Petrovitch intended to go into the subject as soonas he reached Petersburg and, if necessary, to anticipatecontingencies by seeking the favour of "our younger generation." Herelied on Andrey Semyonovitch for this and before his visit toRaskolnikov he had succeeded in picking up some current phrases. Hesoon discovered that Andrey Semyonovitch was a commonplacesimpleton, but that by no means reassured Pyotr Petrovitch. Even if hehad been certain that all the progressives were fools like him, itwould not have allayed his uneasiness. All the doctrines, the ideas,the systems with which Andrey Semyonovitch pestered him had nointerest for him. He had his own object- he simply wanted to findout at once what was happening here. Had these people any power ornot? Had he anything to fear from them? Would they expose anyenterprise of his? And what precisely was now the object of theirattacks? Could he somehow make up to them and get round them if theyreally were powerful? Was this the thing to do or not? Couldn't hegain something through them? In fact hundreds of questions presentedthemselves.

　　Andrey Semyonovitch was an anaemic, scrofulous little man, withstrangely flaxen mutton-chop whiskers of which he was very proud. Hewas a clerk and had almost always something wrong with his eyes. Hewas rather soft-hearted, but self-confident and sometimes extremelyconceited in speech which had an absurd effect, incongruous with hislittle figure. He was one of the lodgers most respected by AmaliaIvanovna, for he did not get drunk and paid regularly for hislodgings. Andrey Semyonovitch really was rather stupid; he attachedhimself to the cause of progress and "our younger generation" fromenthusiasm. He was one of the numerous and varied legion ofdullards, of half-animate abortions, conceited, half-educatedcoxcombs, who attach themselves to the idea most in fashion only tovulgarise it and who caricature every cause they serve, howeversincerely.

　　Though Lebeziatnikov was so good-natured, he, too, was beginningto dislike Pyotr Petrovitch. This happened on both sidesunconsciously. However simple Andrey Semyonovitch might be, he beganto see that Pyotr Petrovitch was duping him and secretly despisinghim, and that "he was not the right sort of man." He had triedexpounding to him the system of Fourier and the Darwinian theory,but of late Pyotr Petrovitch began to listen too sarcastically andeven to be rude. The fact was he had begun instinctively to guess thatLebeziatnikov was not merely a commonplace simpleton, but, perhaps,a liar, too, and that he had no connections of any consequence even inhis own circle, but had simply picked things up third-hand; and thatvery likely he did not even know much about his own work ofpropaganda, for he was in too great a muddle. A fine person he wouldbe to show any one up! It must be noted, by the way, that PyotrPetrovitch had during those ten days eagerly accepted the strangestpraise from Andrey Semyonovitch; he had not protested, for instance,when Andrey Semyonovitch belauded him for being ready to contribute tothe establishment of the new "commune," or to abstain from christeninghis future children, or to acquiesce if Dounia were to take a lovera month after marriage, and so on. Pyotr Petrovitch so enjoyed hearinghis own praises that he did not disdain even such virtues when theywere attributed to him.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch had had occasion that morning to realise somefive per cent. bonds and now he sat down to the table and counted overbundles of notes. Andrey Semyonovitch who hardly ever had any moneywalked about the room pretending to himself to look at all thosebank notes with indifference and even contempt. Nothing would haveconvinced Pyotr Petrovitch that Andrey Semyonovitch could reallylook on the money unmoved, and the latter, on his side, keptthinking bitterly that Pyotr Petrovitch was capable of entertainingsuch an idea about him and was, perhaps, glad of the opportunity ofteasing his young friend by reminding him of his inferiority and thegreat difference between them.

　　He found him incredibly inattentive and irritable, though he, AndreySemyonovitch, began enlarging on his favourite subject, the foundationof a new special "commune." The brief remarks that dropped fromPyotr Petrovitch between the clicking of the beads on the reckoningframe betrayed unmistakable and discourteous irony. But the "humane"Andrey Semyonovitch ascribed Pyotr Petrovitch's ill-humour to hisrecent breach with Dounia and he was burning with impatience todiscourse on that theme. He had something progressive to say on thesubject which might console his worthy friend and "could not fail"to promote his development.

　　"There is some sort of festivity being prepared at that... at thewidow's, isn't there?" Pyotr Petrovitch asked suddenly, interruptingAndrey Semyonovitch at the most interesting passage.

　　"Why, don't you know? Why, I was telling you last night what I thinkabout all such ceremonies. And she invited you too, I heard. Youwere talking to her yesterday..."

　　"I should never have expected that beggarly fool would have spent onthis feast all the money she got from that other fool, Raskolnikov.I was surprised just now as I came through at the preparationsthere, the wines! Several people are invited. It's beyond everything!"continued Pyotr Petrovitch, who seemed to have some object in pursuingthe conversation. "What? You say I am asked too? When was that? Idon't remember. But I shan't go. Why should I? I only said a word toher in passing yesterday of the possibility of her obtaining ayear's salary as a destitute widow of a government clerk. I supposeshe has invited me on that account, hasn't she? He-he-he!"

　　"I don't intend to go either," said Lebeziatnikov.

　　"I should think not, after giving her a thrashing! You might wellhesitate, he-he!"

　　"Who thrashed? Whom?" cried Lebeziatnikov, flustered and blushing.

　　"Why, you thrashed Katerina Ivanovna a month ago. I heard soyesterday... so that's what your convictions amount to... and thewoman question, too, wasn't quite sound, he-he-he!" and PyotrPetrovitch, as though comforted, went back to clicking his beads.

　　"It's all slander and nonsense!" cried Lebeziatnikov, who was alwaysafraid of allusions to the subject. "It was not like that at all, itwas quite different. You've heard it wrong; it's a libel. I was simplydefending myself. She rushed at me first with her nails, she pulledout all my whiskers.... It's permissable for any one I should hopeto defend himself and I never allow any one to use violence to me onprinciple, for it's an act of despotism. What was I to do? I simplypushed her back."

　　"He-he-he!" Luzhin went on laughing maliciously.

　　"You keep on like that because you are out of humour yourself....But that's nonsense and it has nothing, nothing whatever to do withthe woman question! You don't understand; I used to think, indeed,that if women are equal to men in all respects even in strength (as ismaintained now) there ought to be equality in that, too. Of course,I reflected afterwards that such a question ought not really to arise,for there ought not to be fighting and in the future society, fightingis unthinkable... and that it would be a queer thing to seek forequality in fighting. I am not so stupid... though, of course, thereis fighting... there won't be later, but at present there is...confound it! How muddled one gets with you! It's not on that accountthat I am not going. I am not going on principle, not to take partin the revolting convention of memorial dinners, that's why! Though,of course, one might go to laugh at it.... I am sorry there won't beany priests at it. I should certainly go if there were."

　　"Then you would sit down at another man's table and insult it andthose who invited you. Eh?"

　　"Certainly not insult, but protest. I should do it with a goodobject. I might indirectly assist the cause of enlightenment andpropaganda. It's a duty of every man to work for enlightenment andpropaganda and the more harshly, perhaps, the better. I might drop aseed, an idea.... And something might grow up from that seed. Howshould I be insulting them? They might be offended at first, butafterwards they'd see I'd done them a service. You know, Terebyeva(who is in the community now) was blamed because when she left herfamily and... devoted... herself, she wrote to her father and motherthat she wouldn't go on living conventionally and was entering on afree marriage and it was said that that was too harsh, that shemight have spared them and have written more kindly. I think that'sall nonsense and there's no need of softness, on the contrary,what's wanted is protest. Varents had been married seven years, sheabandoned her two children, she told her husband straight out in aletter: 'I have realised that I cannot be happy with you. I cannever forgive you that you have deceived me by concealing from me thatthere is another organisation of society by means of thecommunities. I have only lately learned it from a great-hearted man towhom I have given myself and with whom I am establishing acommunity. I speak plainly because I consider it dishonest todeceive you. Do as you think best. Do not hope to get me back, you aretoo late. I hope you will be happy.' That's how letters like thatought to be written!"

　　"Is that Terebyeva the one you said had made a third free marriage?"

　　"No, it's only the second, really! But what if it were the fourth,what if it were the fifteenth, that's all nonsense! And if ever Iregretted the death of my father and mother, it is now, and Isometimes think if my parents were living what a protest I wouldhave aimed at them! I would have done something on purpose... Iwould have shown them! I would have astonished them! I am really sorrythere is no one!"

　　"To surprise! He-he! Well, be that as you will," Pyotr Petrovitchinterrupted, "but tell me this; do you know the dead man's daughter,the delicate-looking little thing? It's true what they say abouther, isn't it?"

　　"What of it? I think, that is, it is my own personal conviction,that this is the normal condition of women. Why not? I mean,distinguons. In our present society, it is not altogether normal,because it is compulsory, but in the future society, it will beperfectly normal, because it will be voluntary. Even as it is, she wasquite right: she was suffering and that was her asset, so to speak,her capital which she had a perfect right to dispose of. Of course, inthe future society, there will be no need of assets, but her part willhave another significance, rational and in harmony with herenvironment. As to Sofya Semyonovna personally, I regard her action asa vigorous protest against the organization of society, and Irespect her deeply for it; I rejoice indeed when I look at her!"

　　"I was told that you got her turned out of these lodgings."

　　Lebeziatnikov was enraged.

　　"That's another slander," he yelled. "It was not so at all! That wasall Katerina Ivanovna's invention, for she did not understand! And Inever made love to Sofya Semyonovna! I was simply developing her,entirely disinterestedly, trying to rouse her to protest.... All Iwanted was her protest and Sofya Semyonovna could not have remainedhere anyway!"

　　"Have you asked her to join your community?"

　　"You keep on laughing and very inappropriately, allow me to tellyou. You don't understand! There is no such role in a community. Thecommunity is established that there should be no such roles. In acommunity, such a role is essentially transformed and what is stupidhere is sensible there, what, under present conditions, is unnaturalbecomes perfectly natural in the community. It all depends on theenvironment. It's all the environment and man himself is nothing.And I am on good terms with Sofya Semyonovna to this day, which is aproof that she never regarded me as having wronged her. I am tryingnow to attract her to the community, but on quite, quite a differentfooting. What are you laughing at? We are trying to establish acommunity of our own, a special one, on a broader basis. We havegone further in our convictions. We reject more! And meanwhile I'mstill developing Sofya Semyonovna. She has a beautiful, beautifulcharacter!"

　　"And you take advantage of her fine character, eh? He-he!"

　　"No, no! Oh, no! On the contrary."

　　"Oh, on the contrary! He-he-he! A queer thing to say!"

　　"Believe me! Why should I disguise it? In fact, I feel it strangemyself how timid, chaste and modern she is with me!"

　　"And you, of course, are developing her... he-he! trying to prove toher that all that modesty is nonsense?"

　　"Not at all, not at all! How coarsely, how stupidly- excuse mesaying so- you misunderstand the word development! Good heavens,how... crude you still are! We are striving for the freedom of womenand you have only one idea in your head.... Setting aside thegeneral question of chastity and feminine modesty as useless inthemselves and indeed prejudices, I fully accept her chastity with me,because that's for her to decide. Of course if she were to tell meherself that she wanted me, I should think myself very lucky,because I like the girl very much; but as it is, no one has evertreated her more courteously than I, with more respect for herdignity... I wait in hopes, that's all!"

　　"You had much better make her a present of something. I bet younever thought of that."

　　"You don't understand, as I've told you already! Of course, she isin such a position, but it's another question. Quite another question!You simply despise her. Seeing a fact which you mistakenly considerdeserving of contempt, you refuse to take a humane view of a fellowcreature. You don't know what a character she is! I am only sorry thatof late she has quite given up reading and borrowing books. I usedto lend them to her. I am sorry, too, that with all the energy andresolution in protesting- which she has already shown once- she haslittle self-reliance, little, so to say, independence, so as tobreak free from certain prejudices and certain foolish ideas. Yetshe thoroughly understands some questions, for instance aboutkissing of hands, that is, that it's an insult to a woman for a man tokiss her hand, because it's a sign of inequality. We had a debateabout it and I described it to her. She listened attentively to anaccount of the workmen's associations in France, too. Now I amexplaining the question of coming into the room in the futuresociety."

　　"And what's that, pray?"

　　"We had a debate lately on the question: Has a member of thecommunity the right to enter another member's room, whether man orwoman at any time... and we decided that he has!"

　　"It might be at an inconvenient moment, he-he!"

　　Lebeziatnikov was really angry.

　　"You are always thinking of something unpleasant," he cried withaversion. "Tfoo! How vexed I am that when I was expounding our system,I referred prematurely to the question of personal privacy! It'salways a stumbling-block to people like you, they turn into ridiculebefore they understand it. And how proud they are of it, too! Tfoo!I've often maintained that that question should not be approached by anovice till he has a firm faith in the system. And tell me, please,what do you find so shameful even in cesspools? I should be thefirst to be ready to clean out any cesspool you like. And it's not aquestion of self-sacrifice, it's simply work, honourable, usefulwork which is as good as any other and much better than the work ofa Raphael and a Pushkin, because it is more useful."

　　"And more honourable, more honourable, he-he-he!"

　　"What do you mean by 'more honourable'? I don't understand suchexpressions to describe human activity. 'More honourable,' 'nobler'-all those are old-fashioned prejudices which I reject. Everythingwhich is of use to mankind is honourable. I only understand oneword: useful! You can snigger as much as you like, but that's so!"

　　Pyotr Petrovitch laughed heartily. He had finished counting themoney and was putting it away. But some of the notes he left on thetable. The "cesspool question" had already been a subject of disputebetween them. What was absurd was that it made Lebeziatnikov reallyangry, while it amused Luzhin and at that moment he particularlywanted to anger his young friend.

　　"It's your ill-luck yesterday that makes you so ill-humoured andannoying," blurted out Lebeziatnikov, who in spite of his"independence" and his "protests" did not venture to oppose PyotrPetrovitch and still behaved to him with some of the respecthabitual in earlier years.

　　"You'd better tell me this," Pyotr Petrovitch interrupted withhaughty displeasure, "can you... or rather are you really friendlyenough with that young person to ask her to step in here for a minute?I think they've all come back from the cemetery... I hear the sound ofsteps... I want to see her, that young person."

　　"What for?" Lebeziatnikov asked with surprise.

　　"Oh, I want to. I am leaving here to-day or to-morrow andtherefore I wanted to speak to her about... However, you may bepresent during the interview. It's better you should be, indeed. Forthere's no knowing what you might imagine."

　　"I shan't imagine anything. I only asked and, if you've anythingto say to her, nothing is easier than to call her in. I'll go directlyand you may be sure I won't be in your way."

　　Five minutes later Lebeziatnikov came in with Sonia. She came invery much surprised and overcome with shyness as usual. She was alwaysshy in such circumstances and was always afraid of new people, she hadbeen as a child and was even more so now.... Pyotr Petrovitch mether "politely and affably," but with a certain shade of banteringfamiliarity which in his opinion was suitable for a man of hisrespectability and weight in dealing with a creature so young and sointeresting as she. He hastened to "reassure" her and made her sitdown facing him at the table. Sonia sat down, looked about her- atLebeziatnikov, at the notes lying on the table and then again at PyotrPetrovitch and her eyes remained riveted on him. Lebeziatnikov wasmoving to the door. Pyotr Petrovitch signed to Sonia to remainseated and stopped Lebeziatnikov.

　　"Is Raskolnikov in there? Has he come?" he asked him in a whisper.

　　"Raskolnikov? Yes. Why? Yes, he is there. I saw him just come in....Why?"

　　"Well, I particularly beg you to remain here with us and not toleave me alone with this... young woman. I only want a few wordswith her, but God knows what they may make of it. I shouldn't likeRaskolnikov to repeat anything.... You understand what I mean?"

　　"I understand!" Lebeziatnikov saw the point. "Yes, you are right....Of course, I am convinced personally that you have no reason to beuneasy, but... still, you are right. Certainly I'll stay. I'll standhere at the window and not be in your way...  I think you areright..."

　　Pyotr Petrovitch returned to the sofa, sat down opposite Sonia,looked attentively at her and assumed an extremely dignified, evensevere expression, as much as to say, "don't you make any mistake,madam." Sonia was overwhelmed with embarrassment.

　　"In the first place, Sofya Semyonovna, will you make my excuses toyour respected mamma.... That's right, isn't it? Katerina Ivanovnastands in the place of a mother to you?" Pyotr Petrovitch began withgreat dignity, though affably.

　　It was evident that his intentions were friendly.

　　"Quite so, yes; the place of a mother," Sonia answered, timidlyand hurriedly.

　　"Then will you make my apologies to her? Through inevitablecircumstances I am forced to be absent and shall not be at thedinner in spite of your mamma's kind invitation."

　　"Yes... I'll tell her... at once."

　　And Sonia hastily jumped up from her seat.

　　"Wait, that's not all," Pyotr Petrovitch detained her, smiling ather simplicity and ignorance of good manners, "and you know me little,my dear Sofya Semyonovna, if you suppose I would have ventured totrouble a person like you for a matter of so little consequenceaffecting myself only. I have another object."

　　Sonia sat down hurriedly. Her eyes rested again for an instant onthe grey and rainbow-coloured notes that remained on the table, butshe quickly looked away and fixed her eyes on Pyotr Petrovitch. Shefelt it horribly indecorous, especially for her, to look at anotherperson's money. She stared at the gold eyeglass which Pyotr Petrovitchheld in his left hand and at the massive and extremely handsome ringwith a yellow stone on his middle finger. But suddenly she looked awayand, not knowing where to turn, ended by staring Pyotr Petrovitchagain straight in the face. After a pause of still greater dignityhe continued.

　　"I chanced yesterday in passing to exchange a couple of words withKaterina Ivanovna, poor woman. That was sufficient to enable me toascertain that she is in a position- preternatural, if one may soexpress it."

　　"Yes... preternatural..." Sonia hurriedly assented.

　　"Or it would be simpler and more comprehensible to say, ill."

　　"Yes, simpler and more comprehen... yes, ill."

　　"Quite so. So then from a feeling of humanity and so to speakcompassion, I should be glad to be of service to her in any way,foreseeing her unfortunate position. I believe the whole of thispoverty-stricken family depends now entirely on you?"

　　"Allow me to ask," Sonia rose to her feet, "did you say something toher yesterday of the possibility of a pension? Because she told me youhad undertaken to get her one. Was that true?"

　　"Not in the slightest, and indeed it's an absurdity! I merely hintedat her obtaining temporary assistance as the widow of an officialwho had died in the service- if only she has patronage... butapparently your late parent had not served his full term and had notindeed been in the service at all of late. In fact, if there couldbe any hope, it would be very ephemeral, because there would be noclaim for assistance in that case, far from it.... And she is dreamingof a pension already, he-he-he!... A go-ahead lady!"

　　"Yes, she is. For she is credulous and good-hearted, and shebelieves everything from the goodness of her heart and... and... andshe is like that... yes... You must excuse her," said Sonia, and againshe got up to go.

　　"But you haven't heard what I have to say."

　　"No, I haven't heard," muttered Sonia.

　　"Then sit down." She was terribly confused; she sat down again athird time.

　　"Seeing her position with her unfortunate little ones, I should beglad, as I have said before, so far as lies in my power, to be ofservice, that is, so far as is in my power, not more. One might forinstance get up a subscription for her, or a lottery, something of thesort, such as is always arranged in such cases by friends or evenoutsiders desirous of assisting people. It was of that I intended tospeak to you; it might be done."

　　"Yes, yes... God will repay you for it," faltered Sonia, gazingintently at Pyotr Petrovitch.

　　"It might be, but we will talk of it later. We might begin itto-day, we will talk it over this evening and lay the foundation so tospeak. Come to me at seven o'clock. Mr. Lebeziatnikov, I hope, willassist us. But there is one circumstance of which I ought to warnyou beforehand and for which I venture to trouble you, SofyaSemyonovna, to come here. In my opinion money cannot be, indeed it'sunsafe to put it into Katerina Ivanovna's own hands. The dinner to-dayis a proof of that. Though she has not, so to speak, a crust ofbread for to-morrow and... well, boots or shoes, or anything; shehas bought to-day Jamaica rum, and even, I believe, Madeira and... andcoffee. I saw it as I passed through. To-morrow it will all fallupon you again, they won't have a crust of bread. It's absurd, really,and so, to my thinking, a subscription ought to be raised so thatthe unhappy widow should not know of the money, but only you, forinstance. Am I right?"

　　"I don't know... this is only to-day, once in her life.... She wasso anxious to do honour, to celebrate the memory.... And she is verysensible... but just as you think and I shall be very, very... theywill all be... and God will reward... and the orphans..."

　　Sonia burst into tears.

　　"Very well, then, keep it in mind; and now will you accept for thebenefit of your relation the small sum that I am able to spare, fromme personally. I am very anxious that my name should not bementioned in connection with it. Here... having so to speakanxieties of my own, I cannot do more..."

　　And Pyotr Petrovitch held out to Sonia a ten-rouble note carefullyunfolded. Sonia took it, flushed crimson, jumped up, mutteredsomething and began taking leave. Pyotr Petrovitch accompanied herceremoniously to the door. She got out of the room at last, agitatedand distressed, and returned to Katerina Ivanovna, overwhelmed withconfusion.

　　All this time Lebeziatnikov had stood at the window or walkedabout the room, anxious not to interrupt the conversation; whenSonia had gone he walked up to Pyotr Petrovitch and solemnly heldout his hand.

　　"I heard and saw everything," he said, laying stress on the lastverb. "That is honourable, I mean to say, it's humane! You wanted toavoid gratitude, I saw! And although I cannot, I confess, in principlesympathise with private charity, for it not only fails to eradicatethe evil but even promotes it, yet I must admit that I saw your actionwith pleasure- yes, yes, I like it."

　　"That's all nonsense," muttered Pyotr Petrovitch, somewhatdisconcerted, looking carefully at Lebeziatnikov.

　　"No, it's not nonsense! A man who has suffered distress andannoyance as you did yesterday and who yet can sympathise with themisery of others, such a man... even though he is making a socialmistake- is still deserving of respect! I did not expect it indeedof you, Pyotr Petrovitch, especially as according to your ideas... oh,what a drawback your ideas are to you! How distressed you are forinstance by your ill luck yesterday," cried the simple-heartedLebeziatnikov, who felt a return of affection for Pyotr Petrovitch."And, what do you want with marriage, with legal marriage, my dear,noble Pyotr Petrovitch? Why do you cling to this legality of marriage?Well, you may beat me if you like, but I am glad, positively glad ithasn't come off, that you are free, that you are not quite lost forhumanity.... you see, I've spoken my mind!"

　　"Because I don't want in your free marriage to be made a fool of andto bring up another man's children, that's why I want legal marriage,"Luzhin replied in order to make some answer.

　　He seemed preoccupied by something.

　　"Children? You referred to children," Lebeziatnikov started off likea warhorse at the trumpet call. "Children are a social question anda question of first importance, I agree; but the question ofchildren has another solution. Some refuse to have childrenaltogether, because they suggest the institution of the family.We'll speak of children later, but now as to the question of honour, Iconfess that's my weak point. That horrid, military, Pushkinexpression is unthinkable in the dictionary of the future. What doesit mean indeed? It's nonsense, there will be no deception in a freemarriage! That is only the natural consequence of a legal marriage, soto say, its corrective, a protest. So that indeed it's nothumiliating... and if I ever, to suppose an absurdity, were to belegally married, I should be positively glad of it. I should say to mywife: 'My dear, hitherto I have loved you, now I respect you, foryou've shown you can protest!' You laugh! That's because you are ofincapable of getting away from prejudices. Confound it all! Iunderstand now where the unpleasantness is of being deceived in alegal marriage, but it's simply a despicable consequence of adespicable position in which both are humiliated. When the deceptionis open, as in a free marriage, then it does not exist, it'sunthinkable. Your wife will only prove how she respects you byconsidering you incapable of opposing her happiness and avengingyourself on her for her new husband. Damn it all! I sometimes dream ifI were to be married, foo! I mean if I were to marry, legally ornot, it's just the same, I should present my wife with a lover ifshe had not found one for herself. 'My dear,' I should say, 'I loveyou, but even more than that I desire you to respect me. See!' Am Inot right?"

　　Pyotr Petrovitch sniggered as he listened, but without muchmerriment. He hardly heard it indeed. He was preoccupied withsomething else and even Lebeziatnikov at last noticed it. PyotrPetrovitch seemed excited and rubbed his hands. Lebeziatnikovremembered all this and reflected upon it afterwards.

　　Chapter Two

　　IT WOULD be difficult to explain exactly what could haveoriginated the idea of that senseless dinner in Katerina Ivanovna'sdisordered brain. Nearly ten of the twenty roubles, given byRaskolnikov for Marmeladov's funeral, were wasted upon it. PossiblyKaterina Ivanovna felt obliged to honour the memory of the deceased"suitably," that all the lodgers, and still more Amalia Ivanovna,might know "that he was in no way their inferior, and perhaps verymuch their superior," and that no one had the right "to turn up hisnose at him." Perhaps the chief element was that peculiar "poorman's pride," which compels many poor people to spend their lastsavings on some traditional social ceremony, simply in order to do"like other people," and not to "be looked down upon." It is veryprobable, too, that Katerina Ivanovna longed on this occasion, atthe moment when she seemed to be abandoned by every one, to show those"wretched contemptible lodgers" that she knew "how to do things, howto entertain" and that she had been brought up "in a genteel, shemight almost say aristocratic colonel's family" and had not been meantfor sweeping floors and washing the children's rags at night. Even thepoorest and most broken-spirited people are sometimes liable tothese paroxysms of pride and vanity which take the form of anirresistible nervous craving. And Katerina Ivanovna was notbroken-spirited; she might have been killed by circumstance, but herspirit could not have been broken, that is, she could not have beenintimidated, her will could not be crushed. Moreover Sonia had saidwith good reason that her mind was unhinged. She could not be saidto be insane, but for a year past she had been so harassed that hermind might well be overstrained. The later stages of consumption areapt, doctors tell us, to affect the intellect.

　　There was no great variety of wines, nor was there Madeira; but winethere was. There was vodka, rum and Lisbon wine, all of the poorestquality but in sufficient quantity. Besides the traditional rice andhoney, there were three or four dishes, one of which consisted ofpancakes, all prepared in Amalia Ivanovna's kitchen. Two samovars wereboiling, that tea and punch might be offered after dinner. KaterinaIvanovna had herself seen to purchasing the provisions, with thehelp of one of the lodgers, an unfortunate little Pole who had somehowbeen stranded at Madame Lippevechsel's. He promptly put himself atKaterina Ivanovna's disposal and had been all that morning and all theday before running about as fast as his legs could carry him, and veryanxious that every one should be aware of it. For every trifle heran to Katerina Ivanovna, even hunting her out at the bazaar, at everyinstant called her "Pani." She was heartily sick of him before theend, though she had declared at first that she could not have got onwithout this "serviceable and magnanimous man." It was one of KaterinaIvanovna's characteristics to paint every one she met in the mostglowing colours. Her praises were so exaggerated as sometimes to beembarrassing; she would invent various circumstances to the creditof her new acquaintance and quite genuinely believe in theirreality. Then all of a sudden she would be disillusioned and wouldrudely and contemptuously repulse the person she had only a fewhours before been literally adoring. She was naturally of a gay,lively and peace-loving disposition, but from continual failures andmisfortunes she had come to desire so keenly that all should live inpeace and joy and should not dare to break the peace, that theslightest jar, the smallest disaster reduced her almost to frenzy, andshe would pass in an instant from the brightest hopes and fancies tocursing her fate and raving, and knocking her head against the wall.

　　Amalia Ivanovna, too, suddenly acquired extraordinary importancein Katerina Ivanovna's eyes and was treated by her withextraordinary respect, probably only because Amalia Ivanovna hadthrown herself heart and soul into the preparations. She hadundertaken to lay the table, to provide the linen, crockery, &c.,and to cook the dishes in her kitchen, and Katerina Ivanovna hadleft it all in her hands and gone herself to the cemetery.Everything had been well done. Even the tablecloth was nearly clean;the crockery, knives, forks and glasses were, of course, of all shapesand patterns, lent by different lodgers, but the table was properlylaid at the time fixed, and Amalia Ivanovna, feeling she had doneher work well, had put on a black silk dress and a cap with newmourning ribbons and met the returning party with some pride. Thispride, though justifiable, displeased Katerina Ivanovna for somereason: "as though the table could not have been laid except by AmaliaIvanovna!" She disliked the cap with new ribbons, too. "Could she bestuck up, the stupid German, because she was mistress of the house,and had consented as a favour to help her poor lodgers! As a favour!Fancy that! Katerina Ivanovna's father who had been a colonel andalmost a governor had sometimes had the table set for forty persons,and then any one like Amalia Ivanovna, or rather Ludwigovna, would nothave been allowed into the kitchen."

　　Katerina Ivanovna, however, put off expressing her feelings forthe time and contented herself with treating her coldly, though shedecided inwardly that she would certainly have to put AmaliaIvanovna down and set her in her proper place, for goodness onlyknew what she was fancying herself. Katerina Ivanovna was irritatedtoo by the fact that hardly any of the lodgers invited had come to thefuneral, except the Pole who had just managed to run into thecemetery, while to the memorial dinner the poorest and mostinsignificant of them had turned up, the wretched creatures, many ofthem not quite sober. The older and more respectable of them all, asif by common consent, stayed away. Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin, forinstance, who might be said to be the most respectable of all thelodgers, did not appear, though Katerina Ivanovna had the eveningbefore told all the world, that is Amalia Ivanovna, Polenka, Sonia andthe Pole, that he was the most generous, noble-hearted man with alarge property and vast connections, who had been a friend of herfirst husband's, and a guest in her father's house, and that he hadpromised to use all his influence to secure her a considerablepension. It must be noted that when Katerina Ivanovna exalted anyone's connections and fortune, it was without any ulterior motive,quite disinterestedly, for the mere pleasure of adding to theconsequence of the person praised. Probably "taking his cue" fromLuzhin, "that contemptible wretch Lebeziatnikov had not turned upeither. What did he fancy himself? He was only asked out of kindnessand because he was sharing the same room with Pyotr Petrovitch and wasa friend of his, so that it would have been awkward not to invitehim."

　　Among those who failed to appear were "the genteel lady and herold-maidish daughter," who had only been lodgers in the house forthe last fortnight, but had several times complained of the noiseand uproar in Katerina Ivanovna's room, especially when Marmeladov hadcome back drunk. Katerina Ivanovna heard this from Amalia Ivanovnawho, quarrelling with Katerina Ivanovna, and threatening to turn thewhole family out of doors, had shouted at her that they "were notworth the foot" of the honourable lodgers whom they were disturbing.Katerina Ivanovna determined now to invite this lady and her daughter,"whose foot she was not worth," and who had turned away haughtily whenshe casually met them, so that they might know that "she was morenoble in her thoughts and feelings and did not harbour malice," andmight see that she was not accustomed to her way of living. She hadproposed to make this clear to them at dinner with allusions to herlate father's governorship, and also at the same time to hint thatit was exceedingly stupid of them to turn away on meeting her. The fatcolonel-major (he was really a discharged officer of low rank) wasalso absent, but it appeared that he had been "not himself" for thelast two days. The party consisted of the Pole, a wretched lookingclerk with a spotty face and a greasy coat, who had not a word tosay for himself, and smelt abominably, a deaf and almost blind old manwho had once been in the post office and who had been fromimmemorial ages maintained by some one at Amalia Ivanovna's.

　　A retired clerk of the commissariat department came, too; he wasdrunk, had a loud and most unseemly laugh and only fancy- waswithout a waistcoat! One of the visitors sat straight down to thetable without even greeting Katerina Ivanovna. Finally one personhaving no suit appeared in his dressing gown, but this was too much,and the efforts of Amalia Ivanovna and the Pole succeeded inremoving him. The Pole brought with him, however, two other Poleswho did not live at Amalia Ivanovna's and whom no one had seen herebefore. All this irritated Katerina Ivanovna intensely. "For whomhad they made all these preparations then?" To make room for thevisitors the children had not even been laid for at the table; but thetwo little ones were sitting on a bench in the furthest corner withtheir dinner laid on a box, while Polenka as a big girl had to lookafter them, feed them, and keep their noses wiped like well-bredchildren's.

　　Katerina Ivanovna, in fact, could hardly help meeting her guestswith increased dignity, and even haughtiness. She stared at some ofthem with special severity, and loftily invited them to take theirseats. Rushing to the conclusion that Amalia Ivanovna must beresponsible for those who were absent, she began treating her withextreme nonchalance, which the latter promptly observed andresented. Such a beginning was no good omen for the end. All wereseated at last.

　　Raskolnikov came in almost at the moment of their return from thecemetery. Katerina Ivanovna was greatly delighted to see him, in thefirst place, because he was the one "educated visitor, and, as everyone knew, was in two years to take a professorship in the university,"and secondly because he immediately and respectfully apologised forhaving been unable to be at the funeral. She positively pounced uponhim, and made him sit on her left hand (Amalia Ivanovna was on herright). In spite of her continual anxiety that the dishes should bepassed round correctly and that every one should taste them, inspite of the agonising cough which interrupted her every minute andseemed to have grown worse during the last few days she hastened topour out in a half whisper to Raskolnikov all her suppressedfeelings and her just indignation at the failure of the dinner,interspersing her remarks with lively and uncontrollable laughter atthe expense of her visitors and especially of her landlady.

　　"It's all that cuckoo's fault! You know whom I mean? Her, her!"Katerina Ivanovna nodded towards the landlady. "Look at her, she'smaking round eyes, she feels that we are talking about her and can'tunderstand. Pfoo, the owl! Ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.) And what doesshe put on that cap for? (Cough-cough-cough.) Have you noticed thatshe wants every one to consider that she is patronising me and doingme an honour by being here? I asked her like a sensible woman toinvite people, especially those who knew my late husband, and lookat the set of fools she has brought! The sweeps! Look at that one withthe spotty face. And those wretched Poles, ha-ha-ha!(Cough-cough-cough.) Not one of them has ever poked his nose inhere, I've never set eyes on them. What have they come here for, I askyou? There they sit in a row. Hey, Pan!" she cried suddenly to oneof them, "have you tasted the pancakes? Take some more! Have somebeer! Won't you have some vodka? Look, he's jumped up and is makinghis bows, they must be quite starved, poor things. Never mind, letthem eat! They don't make a noise, anyway, though I'm really afraidfor our landlady's silver spoons... Amalia Ivanovna!" she addressedher suddenly, almost aloud, "if your spoons should happen to bestolen, I won't be responsible, I warn you! Ha-ha-ha!" She laughedturning to Raskolnikov, and again nodding towards the landlady, inhigh glee at her sally. "She didn't understand, she didn'tunderstand again! Look how she sits with her mouth open! An owl, areal owl! An owl in new ribbons, ha-ha-ha!"

　　Here her laugh turned again to an insufferable fit of coughingthat lasted five minutes. Drops of perspiration stood out on herforehead and her handkerchief was stained with blood. She showedRaskolnikov the blood in silence, and as soon as she could get herbreath began whispering to him again with extreme animation and ahectic flush on her cheeks.

　　"Do you know, I gave her the most delicate instructions, so tospeak, for inviting that lady and her daughter, you understand of whomI am speaking? It needed the utmost delicacy, the greatest nicety, butshe has managed things so that that fool, that conceited baggage, thatprovincial nonentity, simply because she is the widow of a major,and has come to try and get a pension and to fray out her skirts inthe government offices, because at fifty she paints her face(everybody knows it)... a creature like that did not think fit tocome, and has not even answered the invitation, which the mostordinary good manners required! I can't understand why PyotrPetrovitch has not come! But where's Sonia? Where has she gone? Ah,there she is at last! what is it, Sonia, where have you been? It's oddthat even at your father's funeral you should be so unpunctual. RodionRomanovitch, make room for her beside you. That's your place, Sonia...take what you like. Have some of the cold entree with jelly, that'sthe best. They'll bring the pancakes directly. Have they given thechildren some? Polenka, have you got everything?(Cough-cough-cough.) That's all right. Be a good girl, Lida, and,Kolya, don't fidget with your feet; sit like a little gentleman.What are you saying, Sonia?"

　　Sonia hastened to give her Pyotr Petrovitch's apologies, trying tospeak loud enough for every one to hear and carefully choosing themost respectful phrases which she attributed to Pyotr Petrovitch.She added that Pyotr Petrovitch had particularly told her to say that,as soon as he possibly could, he would come immediately to discussbusiness alone with her and to consider what could be done for her,&c., &c.

　　Sonia knew that this would comfort Katerina Ivanovna, wouldflatter her and gratify her pride. She sat down beside Raskolnikov;she made him a hurried bow, glancing curiously at him. But for therest of the time she seemed to avoid looking at him or speaking tohim. She seemed absent-minded, though she kept looking at KaterinaIvanovna, trying to please her. Neither she nor Katerina Ivanovnahad been able to get mourning; Sonia was wearing dark brown, andKaterina Ivanovna had on her only dress, a dark striped cotton one.

　　The message from Pyotr Petrovitch was very successful. Listeningto Sonia with dignity, Katerina Ivanovna inquired with equal dignityhow Pyotr Petrovitch was, then at once whispered almost aloud toRaskolnikov that it certainly would have been strange for a man ofPyotr Petrovitch's position and standing to find himself in such"extraordinary company," in spite of his devotion to her family andhis old friendship with her father.

　　"That's why I am so grateful to you, Rodion Romanovitch, that youhave not disdained my hospitality, even in such surroundings," sheadded almost aloud. "But I am sure that it was only your specialaffection for my poor husband that has made you keep your promise."

　　Then once more with pride and dignity she scanned her visitors,and suddenly inquired aloud across the table of the deaf man:"wouldn't he have some more meat, and had he been given some wine?"The old man made no answer and for a long while could not understandwhat he was asked, though his neighbours amused themselves by pokingand shaking him. He simply gazed about him with his mouth open,which only increased the general mirth.

　　"What an imbecile! Look, look! Why was he brought? But as to PyotrPetrovitch, I always had confidence in him," Katerina Ivanovnacontinued, "and, of course, he is not like..." with an extremely sternface she addressed Amalia Ivanovna so sharply and loudly that thelatter was quite disconcerted, "not like your dressed updraggletails whom my father would not have taken as cooks into hiskitchen, and my late husband would have done them honour if he hadinvited them in the goodness of his heart."

　　"Yes, he was fond of drink, he was fond of it, he did drink!"cried the commissariat clerk, gulping down his twelfth glass of vodka.

　　"My late husband certainly had that weakness, and every one knowsit," Katerina Ivanovna attacked him at once, "but he was a kind andhonourable man, who loved and respected his family. The worst of itwas his good nature made him trust all sorts of disreputable people,and he drank with fellows who were not worth the sole of his shoe.Would you believe it, Rodion Romanovitch, they found a gingerbreadcock in his pocket; he was dead drunk, but he did not forget thechildren!"

　　"A cock? Did you say a cock?" shouted the commissariat clerk.

　　Katerina Ivanovna did not vouchsafe a reply. She sighed, lost inthought.

　　"No doubt you think, like every one, that I was too severe withhim," she went on, addressing Raskolnikov. "But that's not so! Herespected me, he respected me very much! He was a kind-hearted man!And how sorry I was for him sometimes! He would sit in a corner andlook at me, I used to feel so sorry for him, I used to want to be kindto him and then would think to myself: 'be kind to him and he willdrink again,' it was only by severity that you could keep him withinbounds."

　　"Yes, he used to get his hair pulled pretty often," roared thecommissariat clerk again, swallowing another glass of vodka.

　　"Some fools would be the better for a good drubbing, as well ashaving their hair pulled. I am not talking of my late husband now!"Katerina Ivanovna snapped at him.

　　The flush on her cheeks grew more and more marked, her chest heaved.In another minute she would have been ready to make a scene. Many ofthe visitors were sniggering, evidently delighted. They began pokingthe commissariat clerk and whispering something to him. They wereevidently trying to egg him on.

　　"Allow me to ask what are you alluding to," began the clerk, "thatis to say, whose... about whom... did you say just now... But Idon't care! That's nonsense! Widow! I forgive you.... Pass!"

　　And he took another drink of vodka.

　　Raskolnikov sat in silence, listening with disgust. He only ate frompoliteness, just tasting the food that Katerina Ivanovna wascontinually putting on his plate, to avoid hurting her feelings. Hewatched Sonia intently. But Sonia became more and more anxious anddistressed; she, too, foresaw that the dinner would not end peaceably,and saw with terror Katerina Ivanovna's growing irritation. She knewthat she, Sonia, was the chief reason for the 'genteel' ladies'contemptuous treatment of Katerina Ivanovna's invitation. She hadheard from Amalia Ivanovna that the mother was positively offendedat the invitation and had asked the question: "how could she let herdaughter sit down beside that young person?" Sonia had a feelingthat Katerina Ivanovna had already heard this and an insult to Soniameant more to Katerina Ivanovna than an insult to herself, herchildren, or her father, Sonia knew that Katerina Ivanovna would notbe satisfied now, "till she had shown those draggletails that theywere both..." To make matters worse some one passed Sonia, from theother end of the table, a plate with two hearts pierced with an arrow,cut out of black bread. Katerina Ivanovna flushed crimson and atonce said aloud across the table that the man who sent it was "adrunken ass!"

　　Amalia Ivanovna was foreseeing something amiss, and at the same timedeeply wounded by Katerina Ivanovna's haughtiness, and to restorethe good-humour of the company and raise herself in their esteem shebegan, apropos of nothing, telling a story about an acquaintance ofhers "Karl from the chemist's," who was driving one night in a cab,and that "the cabman wanted him to kill, and Karl very much begged himnot to kill, and wept and clasped hands, and frightened and fromfear pierced his heart." Though Katerina Ivanovna smiled, she observedat once that Amalia Ivanovna ought not to tell anecdotes in Russian;the latter was still more offended, and she retorted that her "Vateraus Berlin was a very important man, and always went with his hands inpockets." Katerina Ivanovna could not restrain herself and laughedso much that Amalia Ivanovna lost patience and could scarcelycontrol herself.

　　"Listen to the owl!" Katerina Ivanovna whispered at once, hergood-humour almost restored, "she meant to say he kept his hands inhis pockets, but she said he put his hands in people's pockets.(Cough-cough.) And have you noticed, Rodion Romanovitch, that allthese Petersburg foreigners, the Germans especially, are allstupider than we! Can you fancy any one of us telling how 'Karl fromthe chemist's pierced his heart from fear' and that the idiotinstead of punishing the cabman, 'clasped his hands and wept, and muchbegged.' Ah, the fool! And you know she fancies it's very touching anddoes not suspect how stupid she is! To my thinking that drunkencommissariat clerk is a great deal cleverer, anyway one can see thathe has addled his brains with drink, but you know, these foreignersare always so well behaved and serious.... Look how she sitsglaring! She is angry, ha-ha! (Cough-cough-cough.)"

　　Regaining her good-humour, Katerina Ivanovna began at once tellingRaskolnikov that when she had obtained her pension, she intended toopen a school for the daughters of gentlemen in her native townT___. This was the first time she had spoken to him of the project,and she launched out into the most alluring details. It suddenlyappeared that Katerina Ivanovna had in her hands the verycertificate of honour of which Marmeladov had spoken to Raskolnikov inthe tavern, when he told him that Katerina Ivanovna, his wife, haddanced the shawl dance before the governor and other greatpersonages on leaving school. This certificate of honour was obviouslyintended now to prove Katerina Ivanovna's right to open aboarding-school; but she had armed herself with it chiefly with theobject of overwhelming "those two stuck-up draggletails" if theycame to the dinner, and proving incontestably that Katerina Ivanovnawas of the most noble, "she might even say aristocratic family, acolonel's daughter and was far superior to certain adventuresses whohave been so much to the fore of late." The certificate of honourimmediately passed into the hands of the drunken guests, andKaterina Ivanovna did not try to retain it, for it actuallycontained the statement en toutes lettres, that her father was ofthe rank of a major, and also a companion of an order, so that shereally was almost the daughter of a colonel.

　　Warming up, Katerina Ivanovna proceeded to enlarge on the peacefuland happy life they would lead in T___, on the gymnasium teachers whomshe would engage to give lessons in her boarding-school, one a mostrespectable old Frenchman, one Mangot, who had taught KaterinaIvanovna herself in old days and was still living in T___, and wouldno doubt teach in her school on moderate terms. Next she spoke ofSonia who would go with her to T___ and help her in all her plans.At this some one at the further end of the table gave a sudden guffaw.

　　Though Katerina Ivanovna tried to appear to be disdainfullyunaware of it, she raised her voice and began at once speaking withconviction of Sonia's undoubted ability to assist her, of "hergentleness, patience, devotion, generosity and good education,"tapping Sonia on the cheek and kissing her warmly twice. Sonia flushedcrimson, and Katerina Ivanovna suddenly burst into tears,immediately observing that she was "nervous and silly, that she wastoo much upset, that it was time to finish, and as the dinner wasover, it was time to hand round the tea."

　　At that moment, Amalia Ivanovna, deeply aggrieved at taking nopart in the conversation, and not being listened to, made one lasteffort, and with secret misgivings ventured on an exceedingly deep andweighty observation, that "in the future boarding-school she wouldhave to pay particular attention to die Wasche, and that therecertainly must be a good Dame to look after the linen, and secondlythat the young ladies must not novels at night read."

　　Katerina Ivanovna, who certainly was upset and very tired, as wellas heartily sick of the dinner, at once cut short Amalia Ivanovna,saying "she knew nothing about it and was talking nonsense, that itwas the business of the laundry maid, and not of the directress of ahigh-class boarding-school to look after die Wasche, and as fornovel reading, that was simply rudeness, and she begged her to besilent." Amalia Ivanovna fired up and getting angry observed thatshe only "meant her good," and that "she had meant her very good," andthat "it was long since she had paid her Gold for the lodgings."

　　Katerina Ivanovna at once "set her down," saying that it was a lieto say she wished her good, because only yesterday when her deadhusband was lying on the table, she had worried her about thelodgings. To this Amalia Ivanovna very appropriately observed that shehad invited those ladies, but "those ladies had not come, becausethose ladies are ladies and cannot come to a lady who is not alady." Katerina Ivanovna at once pointed out to her, that as she was aslut she could not judge what made one really a lady. AmaliaIvanovna at once declared that her "Vater aus Berlin was a very,very important man, and both hands in pockets went, and always used tosay: poof! poof!" and she leapt up from the table to represent herfather, sticking her hands in her pockets, puffing her cheeks, anduttering vague sounds resembling "poof! poof!" amid loud laughter fromall the lodgers, who purposely encouraged Amalia Ivanovna, hopingfor a fight.

　　But this was too much for Katerina Ivanovna, and she at oncedeclared, so that all could hear, that Amalia Ivanovna probablynever had a father, but was simply a drunken Petersburg Finn, andhad certainly once been a cook and probably something worse. AmaliaIvanovna turned as red as a lobster and squealed that perhaps KaterinaIvanovna never had a father, "but she had a vater aus Berlin andthat he wore a long coat and always said poof-poof-poof!"

　　Katerina Ivanovna observed contemptuously that all knew what herfamily was and that on that very certificate of honour it was statedin print that her father was a colonel, while Amalia Ivanovna'sfather- if she really had one- was probably some Finnish milkman,but that probably she never had a father at all, since it was stilluncertain whether her name was Amalia Ivanovna or Amalia Ludwigovna.

　　At this Amalia Ivanovna, lashed to fury, struck the table with herfist, and shrieked that she was Amalia Ivanovna, and not Ludwigovna,"that her Vater was named Johann and that he was a burgomeister, andthat Katerina Ivanovna's Vater was quite never a burgomeister."Katerina Ivanovna rose from her chair, and with a stern and apparentlycalm voice (though she was pale and her chest was heaving) observedthat "if she dared for one moment to set her contemptible wretch ofa father on a level with her papa, she, Katerina Ivanovna, wouldtear her cap off her head and trample it under foot." AmaliaIvanovna ran about the room, shouting at the top of her voice, thatshe was mistress of the house and that Katerina Ivanovna shouldleave the lodgings that minute; then she rushed for some reason tocollect the silver spoons from the table. There was a great outcry anduproar, the children began crying. Sonia ran to restrain KaterinaIvanovna, but when Amalia Ivanovna shouted something about "the yellowticket," Katerina Ivanovna pushed Sonia away, and rushed at thelandlady to carry out her threat.

　　At that minute the door opened, and Pyotr Petrovitch Luzhin appearedon the threshold. He stood scanning the party with severe and vigilanteyes. Katerina Ivanovna rushed to him.

　　Chapter Three

　　"PYOTR PETROVITCH," she cried, "protect me... you at least! Makethis foolish woman understand that she can't behave like this to alady in misfortune... that there is a law for such things.... I'llgo to the governor-general himself.... She shall answer for it....Remembering my father's hospitality protect these orphans."

　　"Allow me, madam.... Allow me." Pyotr Petrovitch waved her off."Your papa, as you are well aware, I had not the honour of knowing"(some one laughed aloud) "and I do not intend to take part in youreverlasting squabbles with Amalia Ivanovna.... I have come here tospeak of my own affairs... and I want to have a word with yourstepdaughter, Sofya... Ivanovna, I think it is? Allow me to pass."

　　Pyotr Petrovitch, edging by her, went to the opposite corner whereSonia was.

　　Katerina Ivanovna remained standing where she was, as thoughthunderstruck. She could not understand how Pyotr Petrovitch coulddeny having enjoyed her father's hospitility. Though she hadinvented it herself, she believed in it firmly by this time. She wasstruck too by the businesslike, dry and even contemptuously menacingtone of Pyotr Petrovitch. All the clamour gradually died away at hisentrance. Not only was this "serious business man" strikinglyincongruous with the rest of the party, but it was evident, too,that he had come upon some matter of consequence, that someexceptional cause must have brought him and that therefore somethingwas going to happen. Raskolnikov, standing beside Sonia, moved asideto let him pass; Pyotr Petrovitch did not seem to notice him. A minutelater Lebeziatnikov, too, appeared in the doorway; he did not come in,but stood still, listening with marked interest, almost wonder, andseemed for a time perplexed.

　　"Excuse me for possibly interrupting you, but it's a matter ofsome importance," Pyotr Petrovitch observed, addressing the companygenerally. "I am glad indeed to find other persons present. AmaliaIvanovna, I humbly beg you as mistress of the house to pay carefulattention to what I have to say to Sofya Ivanovna. Sofya Ivanovna," hewent on, addressing Sonia, who was very much surprised and alreadyalarmed, "immediately after your visit I found that a hundred-roublenote was missing from my table, in the room of my friend Mr.Lebeziatnikov. If in any way whatever you know and will tell uswhere it is now, I assure you on my word of honour and call allpresent to witness that the matter shall end there. In the oppositecase I shall be compelled to have recourse to very serious measuresand then... you must blame yourself."

　　Complete silence reigned in the room. Even the crying childrenwere still. Sonia stood deadly pale, staring at Luzhin and unable tosay a word. She seemed not to understand. Some seconds passed.

　　"Well, how is it to be then?" asked Luzhin, looking intently at her.

　　"I don't know.... I know nothing about it," Sonia articulatedfaintly at last.

　　"No, you know nothing?" Luzhin repeated and again he paused for someseconds. "Think a moment, mademoiselle," he began severely, but still,as it were, admonishing her. "Reflect, I am prepared to give youtime for consideration. Kindly observe this: if I were not so entirelyconvinced I should not, you may be sure, with my experience venture toaccuse you so directly. Seeing that for such direct accusationbefore witnesses, if false or even mistaken, I should myself in acertain sense be made responsible, I am aware of that. This morningI changed for my own purposes several five per cent. securities forthe sum of approximately three thousand roubles. The account isnoted down in my pocket-book. On my return home I proceeded to countthe money,- as Mr. Lebeziatnikov will bear witness- and after countingtwo thousand three hundred roubles I put the rest in my pocket-book inmy coat pocket. About five hundred roubles remained on the table andamong them three notes of a hundred roubles each. At that moment youentered (at my invitation)- and all the time you were present you wereexceedingly embarrassed; so that three times you jumped up in themiddle of the conversation and tried to make off. Mr. Lebeziatnikovcan bear witness to this. You yourself, mademoiselle, probably willnot refuse to confirm my statement that I invited you through Mr.Lebeziatnikov, solely in order to discuss with you the hopeless anddestitute position of your relative, Katerina Ivanovna (whose dinner Iwas unable to attend), and the advisability of getting up something ofthe nature of a subscription, lottery or the like, for her benefit.You thanked me and even shed tears. I describe all this as it tookplace, primarily to recall it to your mind and secondly to show youthat not the slightest detail has escaped my recollection. Then I tooka ten-rouble note from the table and handed it to you by way offirst instalment on my part for the benefit of your relative. Mr.Lebeziatnikov saw all this. Then I accompanied you to the door,- youbeing still in the same state of embarrassment- after which, beingleft alone with Mr. Lebeziatnikov I talked to him for ten minutes,-then Mr. Lebeziatnikov went out and I returned to the table with themoney lying on it, intending to count it and to put it aside, as Iproposed doing before. To my surprise one hundred-rouble note haddisappeared. Kindly consider the position. Mr. Lebeziatnikov Icannot suspect. I am ashamed to allude to such a supposition. I cannothave made a mistake in my reckoning, for the minute before yourentrance I had finished my accounts and found the total correct. Youwill admit that recollecting your embarrassment, your eagerness to getaway and the fact that you kept your hands for some time on the table,and taking into consideration your social position and the habitsassociated with it, I was, so to say, with horror and positivelyagainst my will, compelled to entertain a suspicion- a cruel, butjustifiable suspicion! I will add further and repeat that in spiteof my positive conviction, I realise that I run a certain risk inmaking this accusation, but as you see, I could not let it pass. Ihave taken action and I will tell you why: solely, madam, solely,owing to your black ingratitude! Why! I invite you for the benefitof your destitute relative, I present you with my donation of tenroubles and you, on the spot, repay me for all that with such anaction. It is too bad! You need a lesson. Reflect! Moreover, like atrue friend I beg you- and you could have no better friend at thismoment- think what you are doing, otherwise I shall be immovable!Well, what do you say?"

　　"I have taken nothing," Sonia whispered in terror, "you gave meten roubles, here it is, take it."

　　Sonia pulled her handkerchief out of her pocket, untied a cornerof it, took out the ten rouble note and gave it to Luzhin.

　　"And the hundred roubles you do not confess to taking?" heinsisted reproachfully, not taking the note.

　　Sonia looked about her. All were looking at her with such awful,stern, ironical, hostile eyes. She looked at Raskolnikov... he stoodagainst the wall, with his arms crossed, looking at her with glowingeyes.

　　"Good God!" broke from Sonia.

　　"Amalia Ivanovna, we shall have to send word to the police andtherefore I humbly beg you meanwhile to send for the house porter,"Luzhin said softly and even kindly.

　　"Gott der barmherzige! I knew she was the thief," cried AmaliaIvanovna, throwing up her hands.

　　"You knew it?" Luzhin caught her up, "then I suppose you had somereason before this for thinking so. I beg you, worthy Amalia Ivanovna,to remember your words which have been uttered before witnesses."

　　There was a buzz of loud conversation on all sides. All were inmovement.

　　"What!" cried Katerina Ivanovna, suddenly realising the position,and she rushed at Luzhin. "What! You accuse her of stealing? Sonia?Ah, the wretches, the wretches!"

　　And running to Sonia she flung her wasted arms round her and heldher as in a vise.

　　"Sonia! how dared you take ten roubles from him? Foolish girl!Give it to me! Give me the ten roubles at once- here!

　　And snatching the note from Sonia, Katerina Ivanovna crumpled itup and flung it straight into Luzhin's face. It hit him in the eye andfell on the ground. Amalia Ivanovna hastened to pick it up. PyotrPetrovitch lost his temper.

　　"Hold that mad woman!" he shouted.

　　At that moment several other persons, besides Lebeziatnikov,appeared in the doorway, among them the two ladies.

　　"What! Mad? Am I mad? Idiot!" shrieked Katerina Ivanovna. "You arean idiot yourself, pettifogging lawyer, base man! Sonia, Sonia takehis money! Sonia a thief! Why, she'd give away her last penny!" andKaterina Ivanovna broke into hysterical laughter. "Did you ever seesuch an idiot?" she turned from side to side. "And you too?" shesuddenly saw the landlady, "and you too, sausage eater, you declarethat she is a thief, you trashy Prussian hen's leg in a crinoline! Shehasn't been out of this room: she came straight from you, youwretch, and sat down beside me, every one saw her. She sat here, byRodion Romanovitch. Search her! Since she's not left the room, themoney would have to be on her! Search her, search her! But if youdon't find it, then excuse me, my dear fellow, you'll answer for it!I'll go to our Sovereign, to our Sovereign, to our gracious Tsarhimself, and throw myself at his feet, to-day, this minute! I am alonein the world! They would let me in! Do you think they wouldn't? You'rewrong, I will get in! I will get in! You reckoned on her meekness! Yourelied upon that! But I am not so submissive, let me tell you!You've gone too far yourself. Search her, search her!"

　　And Katerina Ivanovna in a frenzy shook Luzhin and dragged himtowards Sonia.

　　"I am ready, I'll be responsible... but calm yourself, madam, calmyourself. I see that you are not so submissive!... Well, well, butas to that..." Luzhin muttered, "that ought to be before the police...though indeed there are witnesses enough as it is.... I am ready....But in any case it's difficult for a man... on account of hersex.... But with the help of Amalia Ivanovna... though, of course,it's not the way to do things.... How is it to be done?"

　　"As you will! Let any one who likes search her!" cried KaterinaIvanovna. "Sonia, turn out your pockets! See. Look, monster, thepocket is empty, here was her handkerchief! Here is the otherpocket, look! D'you see, d'you see?"

　　And Katerina Ivanovna turned- or rather snatched- both pocketsinside out. But from the right pocket a piece of paper flew out anddescribing a parabola in the air fell at Luzhin's feet. Every onesaw it, several cried out. Pyotr Petrovitch stooped down, picked upthe paper in two fingers, lifted it where all could see it andopened it. It was a hundred-rouble note folded in eight. PyotrPetrovitch held up the note showing it to every one.

　　"Thief! Out of my lodging. Police, police!" yelled AmaliaIvanovna. "They must to Siberia be sent! Away!"

　　Exclamations arose on all sides. Raskolnikov was silent, keeping hiseyes fixed on Sonia, except for an occasional rapid glance atLuzhin. Sonia stood still, as though unconscious. She was hardlyable to feel surprise. Suddenly the colour rushed to her cheeks; sheuttered a cry and hid her face in her hands.

　　"No, it wasn't I! I didn't take it! I know nothing about it," shecried with a heartrending wail, and she ran to Katerina Ivanovna,who clasped her tightly in her arms, as though she would shelter herfrom all the world.

　　"Sonia! Sonia! I don't believe it! You see, I don't believe it!" shecried in the face of the obvious fact, swaying her to and fro in herarms like a baby, kissing her face continually, then snatching ather hands and kissing them, too. "You took it! How stupid these peopleare! Oh dear! You are fools, fools," she cried, addressing the wholeroom, "you don't know, you don't know what a heart she has, what agirl she is! She take it, she? She'd sell her last rag, she'd gobarefoot to help you if you needed it, that's what she is! She has theyellow passport because my children were starving, she sold herselffor us! Ah, husband, husband! Do you see? Do you see? What amemorial dinner for you! Merciful heavens! Defend her, why are you allstanding still? Rodion Romanovitch, why don't you stand up for her? Doyou believe it, too? You are not worth her little finger, all of youtogether! Good God! Defend her now, at least!"

　　The wail of the poor, consumptive, helpless woman seemed toproduce a great effect on her audience. The agonised, wasted,consumptive face, the parched blood-stained lips, the hoarse voice,the tears unrestrained as a child's, the trustful, childish and yetdespairing prayer for help were so piteous that every one seemed tofeel for her. Pyotr Petrovitch at any rate was at once moved tocompassion.

　　"Madam, madam, this incident does not reflect upon you!" he criedimpressively, "no one would take upon himself to accuse you of beingan instigator or even an accomplice in it, especially as you haveproved her guilt by turning out her pockets, showing that you had noprevious idea of it. I am most ready, most ready to show compassion,if poverty, so to speak, drove Sofya Semyonovna to it, but why did yourefuse to confess, mademoiselle? Were you afraid of the disgrace?The first step? You lost your head, perhaps? One can quiteunderstand it.... But how could you have lowered yourself to such anaction? Gentlemen," he addressed the whole company, "gentlemen!Compassionate and so to say commiserating these people, I am readyto overlook it even now in spite of the personal insult lavishedupon me! And may this disgrace be a lesson to you for the future,"he said, addressing Sonia, "and I will carry the matter no further.Enough!"

　　Pyotr Petrovitch stole a glance at Raskolnikov. Their eyes met,and the fire in Raskolnikov's seemed ready to reduce him to ashes.Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna apparently heard nothing. She waskissing and hugging Sonia like a madwoman. The children, too, wereembracing Sonia on all sides, and Polenka,- though she did not fullyunderstand what was wrong,- was drowned in tears and shaking withsobs, as she hid her pretty little face, swollen with weeping, onSonia's shoulder.

　　"How vile!" a loud voice cried suddenly in the doorway.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch looked round quickly.

　　"What vileness!" Lebeziatnikov repeated, staring him straight in theface.

　　Pyotr Petrovitch gave a positive start- all noticed it andrecalled it afterwards. Lebeziatnikov strode into the room.

　　"And you dared to call me as witness?" he said, going up to PyotrPetrovitch.

　　"What do you mean? What are you talking about?" muttered Luzhin.

　　"I mean that you... are a slanderer, that's what my words mean!"Lebeziatnikov said hotly, looking sternly at him with his shortsightedeyes.

　　He was extremely angry. Raskolnikov gazed intently at him, as thoughseizing and weighing each word. Again there was a silence. PyotrPetrovitch indeed seemed almost dumbfounded for the first moment.

　　"If you mean that for me,..." he began, stammering. "But what'sthe matter with you? Are you out of your mind?"

　　"I'm in my mind, but you are a scoundrel! Ah, how vile! I have heardeverything. I kept waiting on purpose to understand it, for I must owneven now it is not quite logical.... What you have done it all for Ican't understand."

　　"Why, what have I done then? Give over talking in your nonsensicalriddles! Or maybe you are drunk!"

　　"You may be a drunkard, perhaps, vile man, but I am not! I nevertouch vodka, for it's against my convictions. Would you believe it,he, he himself, with his own hands gave Sofya Semyonovna thathundred-rouble note- I saw it, I was a witness, I'll take my oath!He did it, he!" repeated Lebeziatnikov, addressing all.

　　"Are you crazy, milksop?" squealed Luzhin. "She is herself beforeyou,- she herself here declared just now before every one that Igave her only ten roubles. How could I have given it to her?"

　　"I saw it, I saw it," Lebeziatnikov repeated, "and although it isagainst my principles, I am ready this very minute to take any oathyou like before the court, for I saw how you slipped it in her pocket.Only like a fool I thought you did it out of kindness! When you weresaying good-bye to her at the door, while you held her hand in onehand, with the other, the left, you slipped the note into herpocket. I saw it, I saw it!"

　　Luzhin turned pale.

　　"What lies!" he cried impudently, "why, how could you, standing bythe window, see the note! You fancied it with your shortsightedeyes. You are raving!"

　　"No, I didn't fancy it. And though I was standing some way off, Isaw it all. And though it certainly would be hard to distinguish anote from the window,- that's true- I knew for certain that it was ahundred-rouble note, because, when you were going to give SofyaSemyonovna ten roubles, you took up from the table a hundred-roublenote (I saw it because I was standing near then, and an idea struck meat once, so that I did not forget you had it in your hand). You foldedit and kept it in your hand all the time. I didn't think of it againuntil, when you were getting up, you changed it from your right handto your left and nearly dropped it! I noticed it because the same ideastruck me again, that you meant to do her a kindness without myseeing. You can fancy how I watched you and I saw how you succeeded inslipping it into her pocket. I saw it, I saw it, I'll take my oath."

　　Lebeziatnikov was almost breathless. Exclamations arose on all handschiefly expressive of wonder, but some were menacing in tone. They allcrowded round Pyotr Petrovitch. Katerina Ivanovna flew toLebeziatnikov.

　　"I was mistaken in you! Protect her! You are the only one to takeher part! She is an orphan. God has sent you!"

　　Katerina Ivanovna, hardly knowing what she was doing, sank on herknees before him.

　　"A pack of nonsense!" yelled Luzhin, roused to fury, "it's allnonsense you've been talking! 'An idea struck you, you didn't think,you noticed'- what does it amount to? So I gave it to her on the slyon purpose? What for? With what object? What have I to do withthis...?"

　　"What for? That's what I can't understand, but that what I amtelling you is the fact, that's certain! So far from my beingmistaken, you infamous, criminal man, I remember how, on account ofit, a question occurred to me at once, just when I was thanking youand pressing your hand. What made you put it secretly in her pocket?Why you did it secretly, I mean? Could it be simply to conceal it fromme, knowing that my convictions are opposed to yours and that I do notapprove of private benevolence, which effects no radical cure? Well, Idecided that you really were ashamed of giving such a large sum beforeme. Perhaps, too, I thought, he wants to give her a surprise, when shefinds a whole hundred-rouble note in her pocket. (For I know somebenevolent people are very fond of decking out their charitableactions in that way.) Then the idea struck me, too, that you wanted totest her, to see whether, when she found it, she would come to thankyou. Then, too, that you wanted to avoid thanks and that, as thesaying is, your right hand should not know... something of thatsort, in fact. I thought of so many possibilities that I put offconsidering it, but still thought it indelicate to show you I knewyour secret. But another idea struck me again that Sofya Semyonovnamight easily lose the money before she noticed it, that was why Idecided to come in here to call her out of the room and to tell herthat you put a hundred roubles in her pocket. But on my way I wentfirst to Madame Kobilatnikov's to take them the 'General Treatise onthe Positive Method' and especially to recommend Piderit's article(and also Wagner's); then I come on here and what a state of thingsI find! Now could I, could I, have all these ideas and reflections, ifI had not seen you put the hundred-rouble note in her pocket?"

　　When Lebeziatnikov finished his long-winded harangue with thelogical deduction at the end, he was quite tired, and the perspirationstreamed from his face. He could not, alas, even express himselfcorrectly in Russian, though he knew no other language, so that he wasquite exhausted, almost emaciated after this heroic exploit. But hisspeech produced a powerful effect. He had spoken with suchvehemence, with such conviction that every one obviously believed him.Pyotr Petrovitch felt that things were going badly with him.

　　"What is it to do with me if silly ideas did occur to you?" heshouted, "that's no evidence. You may have dreamt it, that's all!And I tell you, you are lying, sir. You are lying and slanderingfrom some spite against me, simply from pique, because I did not agreewith your freethinking, godless, social propositions!"

　　But this retort did not benefit Pyotr Petrovitch. Murmurs ofdisapproval were heard on all sides.

　　"Ah, that's your line now, is it!" cried Lebeziatnikov, "that'snonsense! Call the police and I'll take my oath! There's only onething I can't understand: what made him risk such a contemptibleaction. Oh, pitiful, despicable man!"

　　"I can explain why he risked such an action, and if necessary, I,too, will swear to it," Raskolnikov said at last in a firm voice,and he stepped forward.

　　He appeared to be firm and composed. Every one felt clearly, fromthe very look of him that he really knew about it and that the mysterywould be solved.

　　"Now I can explain it all to myself," said Raskolnikov, addressingLebeziatnikov. "From the very beginning of the business, I suspectedthat there was some scoundrelly intrigue at the bottom of it. Ibegan to suspect it from some special circumstances known to meonly, which I will explain at once to every one: they account foreverything. Your valuable evidence has finally made everything clearto me. I beg all, all to listen. This gentleman (he pointed to Luzhin)was recently engaged to be married to a young lady- my sister, AvdotyaRomanovna Raskolnikov. But coming to Petersburg he quarrelled with me,the day before yesterday, at our first meeting and I drove him outof my room- I have two witnesses to prove it. He is a very spitefulman.... The day before yesterday I did not know that he was stayinghere, in your room, and that consequently on the very day wequarrelled- the day before yesterday- he saw me give Katerina Ivanovnasome money for the funeral, as a friend of the late Mr. Marmeladov. Heat once wrote a note to my mother and informed her that I had givenaway all my money, not to Katerina Ivanovna, but to SofyaSemyonovna, and referred in a most contemptible way to the...character of Sofya Semyonovna, that is, hinted at the character ofmy attitude to Sofya Semyonovna. All this you understand was withthe object of dividing me from my mother and sister, by insinuatingthat I was squandering on unworthy objects the money which they hadsent me and which was all they had. Yesterday evening, before mymother and sister and in his presence, I declared that I had given themoney to Katerina Ivanovna for the funeral and not to Sofya Semyonovnaand that I had no acquaintance with Sofya Semyonovna and had neverseen her before, indeed. At the same time I added that he, PyotrPetrovitch Luzhin, with all his virtues was not worth SofyaSemyonovna's little finger, though he spoke so ill of her. To hisquestion- would I let Sofya Semyonovna sit down beside my sister, Ianswered that I had already done so that day. Irritated that my motherand sister were unwilling to quarrel with me at his insinuations, hegradually began being unpardonably rude to them. A final rupturetook place and he was turned out of the house. All this happenedyesterday evening. Now I beg your special attention: consider: if hehad now succeeded in proving that Sofya Semyonovna was a thief, hewould have shown to my mother and sister that he was almost right inhis suspicions, that he had reason to be angry at my putting my sisteron a level with Sofya Semyonovna, that, in attacking me, he wasprotecting and preserving the honour of my sister, his betrothed. Infact he might even, through all this, have been able to estrange mefrom my family, and no doubt he hoped to be restored to favour withthem; to say nothing of revenging himself on me personally, for he hasgrounds for supposing that the honour and happiness of SofyaSemyonovna are very precious to me. That was what he was workingfor! That's how I understand it. That's the whole reason for it andthere can be no other!"

　　It was like this, or somewhat like this, that Raskolnikov wound uphis speech which was followed very attentively, though ofteninterrupted by exclamations from his audience. But in spite ofinterruptions he spoke clearly, calmly, exactly, firmly. Hisdecisive voice, his tone of conviction and his stern face made a greatimpression on every one.

　　"Yes, yes, that's it," Lebeziatnikov assented gleefully, "thatmust be it, for he asked me, as soon as Sofya Semyonovna came into ourroom, whether you were here, whether I had seen you among KaterinaIvanovna's guests. He called me aside to the window and asked me insecret. It was essential for him that you should be here! That's it,that's it!"

　　Luzhin smiled contemptuously and did not speak. But he was verypale. He seemed to be deliberating on some means of escape. Perhaps hewould have been glad to give up everything and get away, but at themoment this was scarcely possible. It would have implied admitting thetruth of the accusations brought against him. Moreover, the company,which had already been excited by drink, was now too much stirred toallow it. The commissariat clerk, though indeed he had not grasped thewhole position, was shouting louder than any one and was making somesuggestions very unpleasant to Luzhin. But not all those presentwere drunk; lodgers came in from all the rooms. The three Poles weretremendously excited and were continually shouting at him: "The Pan isa lajdak!" and muttering threats in Polish. Sonia had been listeningwith strained attention, though she too seemed unable to grasp it all;she seemed as though she had just returned to consciousness. She didnot take her eyes off Raskolnikov, feeling that all her safety layin him. Katerina Ivanovna breathed hard and painfully and seemedfearfully exhausted. Amalia Ivanovna stood looking more stupid thanany one, with her mouth wide open, unable to make out what hadhappened. She only saw that Pyotr Petrovitch had somehow come togrief.

　　Raskolnikov was attempting to speak again, but they did not let him.Every one was crowding round Luzhin with threats and shouts ofabuse. But Pyotr Petrovitch was not intimidated. Seeing that hisaccusation of Sonia had completely failed, he had recourse toinsolence:

　　"Allow me, gentlemen, allow me! Don't squeeze, let me pass!" hesaid, making his way through the crowd. "And no threats if you please!I assure you it will be useless, you will gain nothing by it. On thecontrary, you'll have to answer, gentlemen, for violentlyobstructing the course of justice. The thief has been more thanunmasked, and I shall prosecute. Our judges are not so blind and...not so drunk, and will not believe the testimony of two notoriousinfidels, agitators, and atheists, who accuse me from motives ofpersonal revenge which they are foolish enough to admit.... Yes, allowme to pass!"

　　"Don't let me find a trace of you in my room! Kindly leave atonce, and everything is at an end between us! When I think of thetrouble I've been taking, the way I've been expounding... all thisfortnight!"

　　"I told you myself to-day that I was going, when you tried to keepme; now I will simply add that you are a fool. I advise you to see adoctor for your brains and your short sight. Let me pass, gentlemen!"

　　He forced his way through. But the commissariat clerk wasunwilling to let him off so easily: he picked up a glass from thetable, brandished it in the air and flung it at Pyotr Petrovitch;but the glass flew straight at Amalia Ivanovna. She screamed, andthe clerk, overbalancing, fell heavily under the table. PyotrPetrovitch made his way to his room and half an hour later had leftthe house. Sonia, timid by nature, had felt before that day that shecould be ill-treated more easily than any one, and that she could bewronged with impunity. Yet till that moment she had fancied that shemight escape misfortune by care, gentleness and submissivenessbefore every one. Her disappointment was too great. She could, ofcourse, bear with patience and almost without murmur anything, eventhis. But for the first minute she felt it too bitter. In spite of hertriumph and her justification- when her first terror andstupefaction had passed and she could understand it all clearly- thefeeling of her helplessness and of the wrong done to her made herheart throb with anguish and she was overcome with hysterical weeping.At last, unable to bear any more, she rushed out of the room and ranhome, almost immediately after Luzhin's departure. When amidst loudlaughter the glass flew at Amalia Ivanovna, it was more than thelandlady could endure. With a shriek she rushed like a fury atKaterina Ivanovna, considering her to blame for everything.

　　"Out of my lodgings! At once! Quick march!"

　　And with these words she began snatching up everything she could layher hands on that belonged to Katerina Ivanovna, and throwing it onthe floor, Katerina Ivanovna, pale, almost fainting, and gasping forbreath, jumped up from the bed where she had sunk in exhaustion anddarted at Amalia Ivanovna. But the battle was too unequal: thelandlady waved her away like a feather.

　　"What! As though that godless calumny was not enough- this vilecreature attacks me! What! On the day of my husband's funeral I amturned out of my lodgings! After eating my bread and salt she turns meinto the street, with my orphans! Where am I to go?" wailed the poorwoman, sobbing and gasping. "Good God!" she cried with flashingeyes, "is there no justice upon earth? Whom should you protect ifnot us orphans? We shall see! There is law and justice on earth, thereis, I will find it! Wait a bit, godless creature! Polenka, stay withthe children, I'll come back. Wait for me, if you have to wait inthe street. We will see whether there is justice on earth!"

　　And throwing over her head that green shawl which Marmeladov hadmentioned to Raskolnikov, Katerina Ivanovna squeezed her way throughthe disorderly and drunken crowd of lodgers who still filled the room,and, wailing and tearful, she ran into the street- with a vagueintention of going at once somewhere to find justice. Polenka with thetwo little ones in her arms crouched, terrified, on the trunk in thecorner of the room, where she waited trembling for her mother tocome back. Amalia Ivanovna raged about the room, shrieking,lamenting and throwing everything she came across on the floor. Thelodgers talked incoherently, some commented to the best of theirability on what had happened, others quarreled and swore at oneanother, while others struck up a song....

　　"Now it's time for me to go," thought Raskolnikov. "Well, SofyaSemyonovna, we shall see what you'll say now!"

　　And he set off in the direction of Sonia's lodgings.

　　Chapter Four

　　RASKOLNIKOV had been a vigorous and active champion of Sonia againstLuzhin, although he had such a load of horror and anguish in his ownheart. But having gone through so much in the morning, he found a sortof relief in a change of sensations, apart from the strong personalfeeling which impelled him to defend Sonia. He was agitated too,especially at some moments, by the thought of his approachinginterview with Sonia: he had to tell her who had killed Lizaveta. Heknew the terrible suffering it would be to him and, as it were,brushed away the thought of it. So when he cried as he left KaterinaIvanovna's, "Well, Sofya Semyonovna, we shall see what you'll saynow!" he was still superficially excited, still vigorous and defiantfrom his triumph over Luzhin. But, strange to say, by the time hereached Sonia's lodging, he felt a sudden impotence and fear. He stoodstill in hesitation at the door, asking himself the strangequestion: "Must I tell her who killed Lizaveta?" It was a strangequestion because he felt at the very time not only that he could nothelp telling her, but also that he could not put off the telling. Hedid not yet know why it must be so, he only felt it, and the agonisingsense of his impotence before the inevitable almost crushed him. Tocut short his hesitation and suffering, he quickly opened the door andlooked at Sonia from the doorway. She was sitting with her elbows onthe table and her face in her hands, but seeing Raskolnikov she got upat once and came to meet him as though she were expecting him.

　　"What would have become of me but for you!" she said quickly,meeting him in the middle of the room.

　　Evidently she was in haste to say this to him. It was what she hadbeen waiting for.

　　Raskolnikov went to the table and sat down on the chair from whichshe had only just risen. She stood facing him, two steps away, just asshe had done the day before.

　　"Well, Sonia?" he said, and felt that his voice was trembling, "itwas all due to 'your social position and the habits associated withit.' Did you understand that just now?"

　　Her face showed her distress.

　　"Only don't talk to me as you did yesterday," she interrupted him."Please don't begin it. There is misery enough without that."

　　She made haste to smile, afraid that he might not like the reproach.

　　"I was silly to come away from there. What is happening there now? Iwanted to go back directly, but I kept thinking that... you wouldcome."

　　He told her that Amalia Ivanovna was turning them out of theirlodging and that Katerina Ivanovna had run off somewhere "to seekjustice."

　　"My God!" cried Sonia, "let's go at once...."

　　And she snatched up her cape.

　　"It's everlastingly the same thing!" said Raskolnikov, irritably."You've no thought except for them! Stay a little with me."

　　"But... Katerina Ivanovna?"

　　"You won't lose Katerina Ivanovna, you may be sure, she'll come toyou herself since she has run out," he added peevishly. "If shedoesn't find you here, you'll be blamed for it...."

　　Sonia sat down in painful suspense. Raskolnikov was silent, gazingat the floor and deliberating.

　　"This time Luzhin did not want to prosecute you," he began, notlooking at Sonia, "but if he had wanted to, if it had suited hisplans, he would have sent you to prison if it had not been forLebeziatnikov and me. Ah?"

　　"Yes," she assented in a faint voice. "Yes," she repeated,preoccupied and distressed.

　　"But I might easily not have been there. And it was quite anaccident Lebeziatnikov's turning up."

　　Sonia was silent.

　　"And if you'd gone to prison, what then? Do you remember what I saidyesterday?"

　　Again she did not answer. He waited.

　　"I thought you would cry out again 'don't speak of it, leaveoff.'" Raskolnikov gave a laugh, but rather a forced one. "What,silence again?" he asked a minute later. "We must talk aboutsomething, you know. It would be interesting for me to know how youwould decide a certain 'problem' as Lebeziatnikov would say." (Hewas beginning to lose the thread.) "No, really, I am serious. Imagine,Sonia, that you had known all Luzhin's intentions beforehand. Known,that is, for a fact, that they would be the ruin of KaterinaIvanovna and the children and yourself thrown in- since you don'tcount yourself for anything- Polenka too... for she'll go the sameway. Well, if suddenly it all depended on your decision whether heor they should go on living, that is whether Luzhin should go onliving and doing wicked things, or Katerina Ivanovna should die? Howwould you decide which of them was to die? I ask you?"

　　Sonia looked uneasily at him. There was something peculiar in thishesitating question, which seemed approaching something in aroundabout way.

　　"I felt that you were going to ask some question like that," shesaid, looking inquisitively at him.

　　"I dare say you did. But how is it to be answered?"

　　"Why do you ask about what could not happen?" said Soniareluctantly.

　　"Then it would be better for Luzhin to go on living and doing wickedthings? You haven't dared to decide even that!"

　　"But I can't know the Divine Providence.... And why do you askwhat can't be answered? What's the use of such foolish questions?How could it happen that it should depend on my decision- who has mademe a judge to decide who is to live and who is not to live?"

　　"Oh, if the Divine Providence is to be mixed up in it, there is nodoing anything," Raskolnikov grumbled morosely.

　　"You'd better say straight out what you want!" Sonia cried indistress. "You are leading up to something again.... Can you have comesimply to torture me?"

　　She could not control herself and began crying bitterly. He lookedat her in gloomy misery. Five minutes passed.

　　"Of course you're right, Sonia," he said softly at last. He wassuddenly changed. His tone of assumed arrogance and helplessdefiance was gone. Even his voice was suddenly weak. "I told youyesterday that I was not coming to ask forgiveness and almost thefirst thing I've said is to ask forgiveness.... I said that aboutLuzhin and Providence for my own sake. I was asking forgiveness,Sonia...."

　　He tried to smile, but there was something helpless and incompletein his pale smile. He bowed his head and hid his face in his hands.

　　And suddenly a strange, surprising sensation of a sort of bitterhatred for Sonia passed through his heart. As it were wondering andfrightened of this sensation, he raised his head and looked intentlyat her; but he met her uneasy and painfully anxious eyes fixed on him;there was love in them; his hatred vanished like a phantom. It was notthe real feeling; he had taken the one feeling for the other. Itonly meant that that minute had come.

　　He hid his face in his hands again and bowed his head. Suddenly heturned pale, got up from his chair, looked at Sonia, and withoututtering a word sat down mechanically on her bed.

　　His sensations that moment were terribly like the moment when he hadstood over the old woman with the axe in his hand and felt that "hemust not lose another minute."

　　"What's the matter?" asked Sonia, dreadfully frightened.

　　He could not utter a word. This was not at all, not at all the wayhe had intended to "tell" and he did not understand what was happeningto him now. She went up to him, softly, sat down on the bed beside himand waited, not taking her eyes off him. Her heart throbbed andsank. It was unendurable; he turned his deadly pale face to her. Hislips worked, helplessly struggling to utter something. A pang ofterror passed through Sonia's heart.

　　"What's the matter?" she repeated, drawing a little away from him.

　　"Nothing, Sonia, don't be frightened.... It's nonsense. It really isnonsense, if you think of it," he muttered, like a man in delirium."Why have I come to torture you?" he added suddenly, looking at her."Why, really? I keep asking myself that question, Sonia...."

　　He had perhaps been asking himself that question a quarter of anhour before, but now he spoke helplessly, hardly knowing what hesaid and feeling a continual tremor all over.

　　"Oh, how you are suffering!" she muttered in distress, lookingintently at him.

　　"It's all nonsense.... Listen, Sonia." He suddenly smiled, a palehelpless smile for two seconds. "You remember what I meant to tell youyesterday?"

　　Sonia waited uneasily.

　　"I said as I went away that perhaps I was saying good-bye forever, but that if I came to-day I would tell you who... who killedLizaveta."

　　She began trembling all over.

　　"Well, here I've come to tell you."

　　"Then you really meant it yesterday?" she whispered with difficulty."How do you know?" she asked quickly, as though suddenly regaining herreason.

　　Sonia's face grew paler and paler, and she breathed painfully.

　　"I know."

　　She paused a minute.

　　"Have they found him?" she asked timidly.

　　"No."

　　"Then how do you know about it?" she asked again, hardly audibly andagain after a minute's pause.

　　He turned to her and looked very intently at her.

　　"Guess," he said, with the same distorted helpless smile.

　　A shudder passed over her.

　　"But you... why do you frighten me like this?" she said, smilinglike a child.

　　"I must be a great friend of his... since I know," Raskolnikovwent on, still gazing into her face, as though he could not turn hiseyes away. "He... did not mean to kill that Lizaveta... he... killedher accidentally.... He meant to kill the old woman when she was aloneand he went there... and then Lizaveta came in... he killed her too."

　　Another awful moment passed. Both still gazed at one another.

　　"You can't guess, then?" he asked suddenly, feeling as though hewere flinging himself down from a steeple.

　　"N-no..." whispered Sonia.

　　"Take a good look."

　　As soon as he had said this again, the same familiar sensation frozehis heart. He looked at her and all at once seemed to see in herface the face of Lizaveta. He remembered clearly the expression inLizaveta's face, when he approached her with the axe and she steppedback to the wall, putting out her hand, with childish terror in herface, looking as little children do when they begin to be frightenedof something, looking intently and uneasily at what frightens them,shrinking back and holding out their little hands on the point ofcrying. Almost the same thing happened now to Sonia. With the samehelplessness and the same terror, she looked at him for a while and,suddenly putting out her left hand, pressed her fingers faintlyagainst his breast and slowly began to get up from the bed, movingfurther from him and keeping her eyes fixed even more immovably onhim. Her terror infected him. The same fear showed itself on his face.In the same way he stared at her and almost with the same childishsmile.

　　"Have you guessed?" he whispered at last.

　　"Good God!" broke in an awful wail from her bosom.

　　She sank helplessly on the bed with her face in the pillows, but amoment later she got up, moved quickly to him, seized both his handsand, gripping them tight in her thin fingers, began looking into hisface again with the same intent stare. In this last desperate look shetried to look into him and catch some last hope. But there was nohope; there was no doubt remaining; it was all true! Later on, indeed,when she recalled that moment, she thought it strange and wondered whyshe had seen at once that there was no doubt. She could not have said,for instance, that she had foreseen something of the sort- and yetnow, as soon as he told her, she suddenly fancied that she hadreally foreseen this very thing.

　　"Stop, Sonia, enough! don't torture me," he begged her miserably.

　　It was not at all, not at all like this he had thought of tellingher, but this is how it happened.

　　She jumped up, seeming not to know what she was doing, and, wringingher hands, walked into the middle of the room; but, quickly wentback and sat down again beside him, her shoulder almost touchinghis. All of a sudden she started as though she had been stabbed,uttered a cry and fell on her knees before him, she did not know why.

　　"What have you done- what have you done to yourself!" she said indespair, and, jumping up, she flung herself on his neck, threw herarms round him, and held him tight.

　　Raskolnikov drew back and looked at her with a mournful smile.

　　"You are a strange girl, Sonia- you kiss me and hug me when I tellyou about that.... You don't think what you are doing."

　　"There is no one- no one in the whole world now so unhappy asyou!" she cried in a frenzy, not hearing what he said, and shesuddenly broke into violent hysterical weeping.

　　A feeling long unfamiliar to him flooded his heart and softened itat once. He did not struggle against it. Two tears started into hiseyes and hung on his eyelashes.

　　"Then you won't leave me, Sonia?" he said, looking at her almostwith hope.

　　"No, no, never, nowhere!" cried Sonia. "I will follow you, I willfollow you everywhere. Oh, my God! Oh, how miserable I am!... Why, whydidn't I know you before! Why didn't you come before? Oh, dear!"

　　"Here I have come."

　　"Yes, now! What's to be done now!... Together, together!" sherepeated as it were unconsciously, and she hugged him again. "I'llfollow you to Siberia!"

　　He recoiled at this, and the same hostile, almost haughty smile cameto his lips.

　　"Perhaps I don't want to go to Siberia yet, Sonia," he said.

　　Sonia looked at him quickly.

　　Again after her first passionate, agonising sympathy for the unhappyman the terrible idea of the murder overwhelmed her. In his changedtone she seemed to hear the murderer speaking. She looked at himbewildered. She knew nothing as yet, why, how, with what object it hadbeen. Now all these questions rushed at once into her mind. Andagain she could not believe it: "He, he is a murderer! Could it betrue?"

　　"What's the meaning of it? Where am I?" she said in completebewilderment, as though still unable to recover herself. "How couldyou, you, a man like you.... How could you bring yourself to it?...What does it mean?"

　　"Oh, well- to plunder. Leave off, Sonia," he answered wearily,almost with vexation.

　　Sonia stood as though struck dumb, but suddenly she cried:

　　"You were hungry! It was... to help your mother? Yes?"

　　"No, Sonia, no," he muttered, turning away and hanging his head."I was not so hungry.... I certainly did want to help my mother,but... that's not the real thing either.... Don't torture me, Sonia."

　　Sonia clasped her hands.

　　"Could it, could it all be true? Good God, what a truth! Who couldbelieve it? And how could you give away your last farthing and yet roband murder! Ah," she cried suddenly, "that money you gave KaterinaIvanovna... that money.... Can that money..."

　　"No, Sonia," he broke in hurriedly, "that money was not it. Don'tworry yourself! That money my mother sent me and it came when I wasill, the day I gave it to you.... Razumihin saw it... he received itfor me.... That money was mine- my own."

　　Sonia listened to him in bewilderment and did her utmost tocomprehend.

　　"And that money.... I don't even know really whether there was anymoney," he added softly, as though reflecting. "I took a purse off herneck, made of chamois leather... a purse stuffed full ofsomething... but I didn't look in it; I suppose I hadn't time....And the things- chains and trinkets- I buried under a stone with thepurse next morning in a yard off the V__ Prospect. They are allthere now....."

　　Sonia strained every nerve to listen.

　　"Then why... why, you said you did it to rob, but you took nothing?"she asked quickly, catching at a straw.

　　"I don't know.... I haven't yet decided whether to take that moneyor not," he said, musing again; and, seeming to wake up with astart, he gave a brief ironical smile. "Ach, what silly stuff I amtalking, eh?"

　　The thought flashed through Sonia's mind, wasn't he mad? But shedismissed it at once. "No, it was something else." She could makenothing of it, nothing.

　　"Do you know, Sonia," he said suddenly with conviction, "let me tellyou: if I'd simply killed because I was hungry," laying stress onevery word and looking enigmatically but sincerely at her, "I shouldbe happy now. You must believe that! What would it matter to you,"he cried a moment later with a sort of despair, "what would itmatter to you if I were to confess that I did wrong! What do yougain by such a stupid triumph over me? Ah, Sonia, was it for that I'vecome to you to-day?"

　　Again Sonia tried to say something, but did not speak.

　　"I asked you to go with me yesterday because you are all I haveleft."

　　"Go where?" asked Sonia timidly.

　　"Not to steal and not to murder, don't be anxious," he smiledbitterly. "We are so different.... And you know, Sonia, it's only now,only this moment that I understand where I asked you to go with meyesterday! Yesterday when I said it I did not know where. I askedyou for one thing, I came to you for one thing- not to leave me. Youwon't leave me, Sonia?"

　　She squeezed his hand.

　　"And why, why did I tell her? Why did I let her know?" he cried aminute later in despair, looking with infinite anguish at her. "Hereyou expect an explanation from me, Sonia; you are sitting andwaiting for it, I see that. But what can I tell you? You won'tunderstand and will only suffer misery... on my account! Well, you arecrying and embracing me again. Why do you do it? Because I couldn'tbear my burden and have come to throw it on another: you suffer too,and I shall feel better! And can you love such a mean wretch?"

　　"But aren't you suffering, too?" cried Sonia.

　　Again a wave of the same feeling surged into his heart, and againfor an instant softened it.

　　"Sonia, I have a bad heart, take note of that. It may explain agreat deal. I have come because I am bad. There are men who wouldn'thave come. But I am a coward and... a mean wretch. But... nevermind! That's not the point. I must speak now, but I don't know howto begin."

　　He paused and sank into thought.

　　"Ach, we are so different," he cried again, "we are not alike. Andwhy, why did I come? I shall never forgive myself that."

　　"No, no, it was a good thing you came," cried Sonia. "It's betterI should know, far better!"

　　He looked at her with anguish.

　　"What if it were really that?" he said, as though reaching aconclusion. "Yes, that's what it was! I wanted to become a Napoleon,that is why I killed her.... Do you understand now?"

　　"N-no," Sonia whispered naively and timidly. "Only speak, speak, Ishall understand, I shall understand in myself!" she kept begging him.

　　"You'll understand? Very well, we shall see!" He paused and wasfor some time lost in meditation.

　　"It was like this: I asked myself one day this question- what ifNapoleon, for instance, had happened to be in my place, and if hehad not had Toulon nor Egypt nor the passage of Mont Blanc to beginhis career with, but instead of all those picturesque and monumentalthings, there had simply been some ridiculous old hag, a pawnbroker,who had to be murdered too to get money from her trunk (for hiscareer, you understand). Well, would he have brought himself tothat, if there had been no other means? Wouldn't he have felt a pangat its being so far from monumental and... and sinful, too? Well, Imust tell you that I worried myself fearfully over that 'question'so that I was awfully ashamed when I guessed at last (all of a sudden,somehow) that it would not have given him the least pang, that itwould not even have struck him that it was not monumental... that hewould not have seen that there was anything in it to pause over, andthat, if he had had no other way, he would have strangled her in aminute without thinking about it! Well, I too... left off thinkingabout it... murdered her, following his example. And that's exactlyhow it was! Do you think it funny? Yes, Sonia, the funniest thing ofall is that perhaps that's just how it was."

　　Sonia did not think it at all funny.

　　"You had better tell me straight out... without examples," shebegged, still more timidly and scarcely audibly.

　　He turned to her, looked sadly at her and took her hands.

　　"You are right again, Sonia. Of course that's all nonsense, it'salmost all talk! You see, you know of course that my mother hasscarcely anything, my sister happened to have a good education and wascondemned to drudge as a governess. All their hopes were centered onme. I was a student, but I couldn't keep myself at the universityand was forced for a time to leave it. Even if I had lingered onlike that, in ten or twelve years I might (with luck) hope to besome sort of teacher or clerk with a salary of a thousand roubles" (herepeated it as though it were a lesson) "and by that time my motherwould be worn out with grief and anxiety and I could not succeed inkeeping her in comfort while my sister... well, my sister might wellhave fared worse! And it's a hard thing to pass everything by allone's life, to turn one's back upon everything, to forget one's motherand decorously accept the insults inflicted on one's sister. Whyshould one? When one has buried them to burden oneself with others-wife and children- and to leave them again without a farthing? So Iresolved to gain possession of the old woman's money and to use it formy first years without worrying my mother, to keep myself at theuniversity and for a little while after leaving it- and to do this allon a broad, thorough scale, so as to build up a completely newcareer and enter upon a new life of independence.... Well... that'sall.... Well, of course in killing the old woman I did wrong.... Well,that's enough."

　　He struggled to the end of his speech in exhaustion and let his headsink.

　　"Oh, that's not it, that's not it," Sonia cried in distress. "Howcould one... no, that's not right, not right."

　　"You see yourself that it's not right. But I've spoken truly, it'sthe truth."

　　"As though that could be the truth! Good God!"

　　"I've only killed a louse, Sonia, a useless, loathsome, harmfulcreature."

　　"A human being- a louse!"

　　"I too know it wasn't a louse," he answered, looking strangely ather. "But I am talking nonsense, Sonia," he added. "I've beentalking nonsense a long time.... That's not it, you are right there.There were quite, quite other causes for it! I haven't talked toanyone for so long, Sonia.... My head aches dreadfully now."

　　His eyes shone with feverish brilliance. He was almost delirious; anuneasy smile strayed on his lips. His terrible exhaustion could beseen through his excitement. Sonia saw how he was suffering. She toowas growing dizzy. And he talked so strangely; it seemed somehowcomprehensible, but yet... "But how, how! Good God!" And she wrung herhands in despair.

　　"No, Sonia, that's not it," he began again suddenly, raising hishead, as though a new and sudden train of thought had struck and as itwere roused him- "that's not it! Better... imagine- yes, it'scertainly better- imagine that I am vain, envious, malicious, base,vindictive and... well, perhaps with a tendency to insanity. (Let'shave it all out at once! They've talked of madness already, Inoticed.) I told you just now I could not keep myself at theuniversity. But do you know that perhaps I might have done? Mymother would have sent me what I needed for the fees and I couldhave earned enough for clothes, boots and food, no doubt. Lessonshad turned up at half a rouble. Razumihin works! But I turned sulkyand wouldn't. (Yes, sulkiness, that's the right word for it!) I sat inmy room like a spider. You've been in my den, you've seen it.... Anddo you know, Sonia, that low ceilings and tiny rooms cramp the souland the mind? Ah, how I hated that garret! And yet I wouldn't go outof it! I wouldn't on purpose! I didn't go out for days together, and Iwouldn't work, I wouldn't even eat, I just lay there doing nothing. IfNastasya brought me anything, I ate it, if she didn't, I went allday without; I wouldn't ask, on purpose, from sulkiness! At night Ihad no light, I lay in the dark and I wouldn't earn money for candles.I ought to have studied, but I sold my books; and the dust lies aninch thick on the notebooks on my table. I preferred lying still andthinking. And I kept thinking.... And I had dreams all the time,strange dreams of all sorts, no need to describe! Only then I began tofancy that... No, that's not it! Again I am telling you wrong! You seeI kept asking myself then: why am I so stupid that if others arestupid- and I know they are- yet I won't be wiser? Then I saw,Sonia, that if one waits for every one to get wiser it will take toolong.... Afterwards I understood that that would never come to pass,that men won't change and that nobody can alter it and that it's notworth wasting effort over it. Yes, that's so. That's the law oftheir nature, Sonia,... that's so!... And I know now, Sonia, thatwhoever is strong in mind and spirit will have power over them. Anyonewho is greatly daring is right in their eyes. He who despises mostthings will be a lawgiver among them and he who dares most of all willbe most in the right! So it has been till now and so it will alwaysbe. A man must be blind not to see it!"

　　Though Raskolnikov looked at Sonia as he said this, he no longercared whether she understood or not. The fever had complete hold ofhim; he was in a sort of gloomy ecstasy (he certainly had been toolong without talking to anyone). Sonia felt that his gloomy creedhad become his faith and code.

　　"I divined then, Sonia," he went on eagerly, "that power is onlyvouchsafed to the man who dares to stoop and pick it up. There is onlyone thing, one thing needful: one has only to dare! Then for the firsttime in my life an idea took shape in my mind which no one had everthought of before me, no one! I saw clear as daylight how strange itis that not a single person living in this mad world has had thedaring to go straight for it all and send it flying to the devil! I...I wanted to have the daring... and I killed her. I only wanted to havethe daring, Sonia! That was the whole cause of it!"

　　"Oh hush, hush," cried Sonia, clasping her hands. "You turned awayfrom God and God has smitten you, has given you over to the devil!"

　　"Then Sonia, when I used to lie there in the dark and all thisbecame clear to me, was it a temptation of the devil, eh?"

　　"Hush, don't laugh, blasphemer! You don't understand, you don'tunderstand! Oh God! He won't understand!"

　　"Hush, Sonia! I am not laughing. I know myself that it was the devilleading me. Hush, Sonia, hush!" he repeated with gloomy insistence. "Iknow it all, I have thought it all over and over and whispered itall over to myself, lying there in the dark.... I've argued it allover with myself, every point of it, and I know it all, all! And howsick, how sick I was then of going over it all! I have kept wanting toforget it and make a new beginning, Sonia, and leave off thinking. Andyou don't suppose that I went into it headlong like a fool? I wentinto it like a wise man, and that was just my destruction. And youmustn't suppose that I didn't know, for instance, that if I began toquestion myself whether I had the right to gain power- I certainlyhadn't the right- or that if I asked myself whether a human being is alouse it proved that it wasn't so for me, though it might be for a manwho would go straight to his goal without asking questions.... If Iworried myself all those days, wondering whether Napoleon would havedone it or not, I felt clearly of course that I wasn't Napoleon. I hadto endure all the agony of that battle of ideas, Sonia, and I longedto throw it off: I wanted to murder without casuistry, to murder formy own sake, for myself alone! I didn't want to lie about it even tomyself. It wasn't to help my mother I did the murder- that's nonsense-I didn't do the murder to gain wealth and power and to become abenefactor of mankind. Nonsense! I simply did it; I did the murder formyself, for myself alone, and whether I became a benefactor to others,or spent my life like a spider catching men in my web and suckingthe life out of men, I couldn't have cared at that moment.... And itwas not the money I wanted, Sonia, when I did it. It was not so muchthe money I wanted, but something else.... I know it all now....Understand me! Perhaps I should never have committed a murder again. Iwanted to find out something else; it was something else led me on.I wanted to find out then and quickly whether I was a louse likeeverybody else or a man. Whether I can step over barriers or not,whether I dare stoop to pick up or not, whether I am a tremblingcreature or whether I have the right..."

　　"To kill? Have the right to kill?" Sonia clasped her hands.

　　"Ach, Sonia!" he cried irritably and seemed about to make someretort, but was contemptuously silent. "Don't interrupt me, Sonia. Iwant to prove one thing only, that the devil led me on then and he hasshown me since that I had not the right to take that path, because Iam just such a louse as all the rest. He was mocking me and hereI've come to you now! Welcome your guest! If I were not a louse,should I have come to you? Listen: when I went then to the old woman'sI only went to try.... You may be sure of that!"

　　"And you murdered her!"

　　"But how did I murder her? Is that how men do murders? Do men goto commit a murder as I went then? I will tell you some day how Iwent! Did I murder the old woman? I murdered myself, not her! Icrushed myself once for all, for ever.... But it was the devil thatkilled that old woman, not I. Enough, enough, Sonia, enough! Let mebe!" he cried in a sudden spasm of agony, "let me be!"

　　He leaned his elbows on his knees and squeezed his head in his handsas in a vise.

　　"What suffering!" A wail of anguish broke from Sonia.

　　"Well, what am I to do now?" he asked, suddenly raising his head andlooking at her with a face hideously distorted by despair.

　　"What are you to do?" she cried, jumping up, and her eyes that hadbeen full of tears suddenly began to shine. "Stand up!" (She seizedhim by the shoulder, he got up, looking at her almost bewildered.) "Goat once, this very minute, stand at the cross-roads, bow down, firstkiss the earth which you have defiled and then bow down to all theworld and say to all men aloud, 'I am a murderer!' Then God willsend you life again. Will you go, will you go?" she asked him,trembling all over, snatching his two hands, squeezing them tight inhers and gazing at him with eyes full of fire.

　　He was amazed at her sudden ecstasy.

　　"You mean Siberia, Sonia? I must give myself up?" he asked gloomily.

　　"Suffer and expiate your sin by it, that's what you must do."

　　"No! I am not going to them, Sonia!"

　　"But how will you go on living? What will you live for?" criedSonia, "how is it possible now? Why, how can you talk to yourmother? (Oh, what will become of them now!) But what am I saying?You have abandoned your mother and your sister already. He hasabandoned them already! Oh, God!" she cried, "why, he knows it allhimself. How, how can he live by himself! What will become of younow?"

　　"Don't be a child, Sonia," he said softly. "What wrong have I donethem? Why should I go to them? What should I say to them? That'sonly a phantom.... They destroy men by millions themselves and look onit as a virtue. They are knaves and scoundrels, Sonia! I am notgoing to them. And what should I say to them- that I murdered her, butdid not dare to take the money and hid it under a stone?" he addedwith a bitter smile. "Why, they would laugh at me, and would call me afool for not getting it. A coward and a fool! They wouldn't understandand they don't deserve to understand. Why should I go to them? Iwon't. Don't be a child, Sonia...."

　　"It will be too much for you to bear, too much!" she repeated,holding out her hands in despairing supplication.

　　"Perhaps I've been unfair to myself," he observed gloomily,pondering, "perhaps after all I am a man and not a louse and I've beenin too great a hurry to condemn myself. I'll make another fight forit."

　　A haughty smile appeared on his lips.

　　"What a burden to bear! And your whole life, your whole life!"

　　"I shall get used to it," he said grimly and thoughtfully. "Listen,"he began a minute later, "stop crying, it's time to talk of the facts:I've come to tell you that the police are after me, on my track...."

　　"Ach!" Sonia cried in terror.

　　"Well, why do you cry out? You want me to go to Siberia and nowyou are frightened? But let me tell you: I shall not give myself up. Ishall make a struggle for it and they won't do anything to me. They'veno real evidence. Yesterday I was in great danger and believed I waslost; but to-day things are going better. All the facts they knowcan be explained two ways, that's to say I can turn theiraccusations to my credit, do you understand? And I shall, for I'velearnt my lesson. But they will certainly arrest me. If it had notbeen for something that happened, they would have done so to-day forcertain; perhaps even now they will arrest me to-day.... But that's nomatter, Sonia; they'll let me out again... for there isn't any realproof against me, and there won't be, I give you my word for it. Andthey can't convict a man on what they have against me. Enough.... Ionly tell you that you may know.... I will try to manage somehow toput it to my mother and sister so that they won't be frightened.... Mysister's future is secure, however, now, I believe... and mymother's must be too.... Well, that's all. Be careful, though. Willyou come and see me in prison when I am there?"

　　"Oh, I will, I will."

　　They sat side by side, both mournful and dejected, as though theyhad been cast up by the tempest alone on some deserted shore. Helooked at Sonia and felt how great was her love for him, and strangeto say he felt it suddenly burdensome and painful to be so loved. Yes,it was a strange and awful sensation! On his way to see Sonia he hadfelt that all his hopes rested on her; he expected to be rid of atleast part of his suffering, and now, when all her heart turnedtowards him, he suddenly felt that he was immeasurably unhappierthan before.

　　"Sonia," he said, "you'd better not come and see me when I am inprison."

　　Sonia did not answer, she was crying. Several minutes passed.

　　"Have you a cross on you?" she asked, as though suddenly thinking ofit.

　　He did not at first understand the question.

　　"No, of course not. Here, take this one, of cypress wood. I haveanother, a copper one that belonged to Lizaveta. I changed withLizaveta: she gave me her cross and I gave her my little ikon. Iwill wear Lizaveta's now and give you this. Take it... it's mine! It'smine, you know," she begged him. "We will go to suffer together, andtogether we will bear our cross!"

　　"Give it me," said Raskolnikov.

　　He did not want to hurt her feelings. But immediately he drew backthe hand he held out for the cross.

　　"Not now, Sonia. Better later," he added to comfort her.

　　"Yes, yes, better," she repeated with conviction, "when you go tomeet your suffering, then put it on. You will come to me, I'll putit on you, we will pray and go together."

　　At that moment some one knocked three times at the door.

　　"Sofya Semyonovna, may I come in?" they heard in a very familiar andpolite voice.

　　Sonia rushed to the door in a fright. The flaxen head of Mr.Lebeziatnikov appeared at the door.

　　Chapter Five

　　LEBEZIATNIKOV looked perturbed.

　　"I've come to you, Sofya Semyonovna," he began. "Excuse me... Ithought I should find you," he said, addressing Raskolnikovsuddenly, "that is, I didn't mean anything... of that sort... But Ijust thought... Katerina Ivanovna has gone out of her mind," heblurted out suddenly, turning from Raskolnikov to Sonia.

　　Sonia screamed.

　　"At least it seems so. But... we don't know what to do, you see! Shecame back- she seems to have been turned out somewhere, perhapsbeaten.... So it seems at least,... She had run to your father'sformer chief, she didn't find him at home: he was dining at some othergeneral's.... Only fancy, she rushed off there, to the othergeneral's, and, imagine, she was so persistent that she managed to getthe chief to see her, had him fetched out from dinner, it seems. Youcan imagine what happened. She was turned out, of course; but,according to her own story, she abused him and threw something at him.One may well believe it.... How it is she wasn't taken up, I can'tunderstand! Now she is telling every one, including Amalia Ivanovna;but it's difficult to understand her, she is screaming and flingingherself about.... Oh yes, she shouts that since every one hasabandoned her, she will take the children and go into the streetwith a barrel-organ, and the children will sing and dance, and shetoo, and collect money, and will go every day under the general'swindow... 'to let every one see well-born children, whose father wasan official, begging in the street.' She keeps beating the childrenand they are all crying. She is teaching Lida to sing 'My Village,'the boy to dance, Polenka the same. She is tearing up all the clothes,and making them little caps like actors; she means to carry a tinbasin and make it tinkle, instead of music.... She won't listen toanything.... Imagine the state of things! It's beyond anything!"

　　Lebeziatnikov would have gone on, but Sonia, who had heard himalmost breathless, snatched up her cloak and hat, and ran out of theroom, putting on her things as she went. Raskolnikov followed herand Lebeziatnikov came after him.

　　"She has certainly gone mad!" he said to Raskolnikov, as they wentout into the street. "I didn't want to frighten Sofya Semyonovna, so Isaid 'it seemed like it,' but there isn't a doubt of it. They say thatin consumption, the tubercles sometimes occur in the brain; it's apity I know nothing of medicine. I did try to persuade her, but shewouldn't listen."

　　"Did you talk to her about the tubercles?"

　　"Not precisely of the tubercles. Besides, she wouldn't haveunderstood! But what I say is, that if you convince a person logicallythat he has nothing to cry about, he'll stop crying. That's clear.Is it your conviction that he won't?"

　　"Life would be too easy if it were so," answered Raskolnikov.

　　"Excuse me, excuse me; of course it would be rather difficult forKaterina Ivanovna to understand, but do you know that in Paris theyhave been conducting serious experiments as to the possibility ofcuring the insane, simply by logical argument? One professor there,a scientific man of standing, lately dead, believed in the possibilityof such treatment. His idea was that there's nothing really wrong withthe physical organism of the insane, and that insanity is, so tosay, a logical mistake, an error of judgment, an incorrect view ofthings. He gradually showed the madman his error and, would youbelieve it, they say he was successful? But as he made use ofdouches too, how far success was due to that treatment remainsuncertain.... So it seems at least."

　　Raskolnikov had long ceased to listen. Reaching the house where helived, he nodded to Lebeziatnikov and went in at the gate.Lebeziatnikov woke up with a start, looked about him and hurried on.

　　Raskolnikov went into his little room and stood still in themiddle of it. Why had he come back here? He looked at the yellow andtattered paper, at the dust, at his sofa.... From the yard came a loudcontinuous knocking; some one seemed to be hammering... He went to thewindow, rose on tiptoe and looked out into the yard for a long timewith an air of absorbed attention. But the yard was empty and he couldnot see who was hammering. In the house on the left he saw some openwindows; on the window-sills were pots of sickly-looking geraniums.Linen was hung out of the windows... He knew it all by heart. Heturned away and sat down on the sofa.

　　Never, never had he felt himself so fearfully alone!

　　Yes, he felt once more that he would perhaps come to hate Sonia, nowthat he had made her more miserable.

　　"Why had he gone to her to beg for her tears? What need had he topoison her life? Oh, the meanness of it!"

　　"I will remain alone," he said resolutely, "and she shall not cometo the prison!"

　　Five minutes later he raised his head with a strange smile. That wasa strange thought.

　　"Perhaps it really would be better in Siberia," he thought suddenly.

　　He could not have said how long he sat there with vague thoughtssurging through his mind. All at once the door opened and Douniacame in. At first she stood still and looked at him from thedoorway, just as he had done at Sonia; then she came in and sat downin the same place as yesterday, on the chair facing him. He lookedsilently and almost vacantly at her.

　　"Don't be angry, brother; I've only come for one minute," saidDounia.

　　Her face looked thoughtful but not stern. Her eyes were bright andsoft. He saw that she too had come to him with love.

　　"Brother, now I know all, all. Dmitri Prokofitch has explained andtold me everything. They are worrying and persecuting you through astupid and contemptible suspicion.... Dmitri Prokofitch told me thatthere is no danger, and that you are wrong in looking upon it withsuch horror. I don't think so, and I fully understand how indignantyou must be, and that that indignation may have a permanent effecton you. That's what I am afraid of. As for your cutting yourself offfrom us, I don't judge you, I don't venture to judge you, andforgive me for having blamed you for it. I feel that I too, if I hadso great a trouble, should keep away from every one. I shall tellmother nothing of this, but I shall talk about you continually andshall tell her from you that you will come very soon. Don't worryabout her; I will set her mind at rest; but don't you try her toomuch- come once at least; remember that she is your mother. And nowI have come simply to say" (Dounia began to get up) "that if youshould need me or should need... all my life or anything... call me,and I'll come. Good-bye!"

　　She turned abruptly and went towards the door.

　　"Dounia!" Raskolnikov stopped her and went towards her. "ThatRazumihin, Dmitri Prokofitch, is a very good fellow."

　　Dounia flushed slightly.

　　"Well?" she asked, waiting a moment.

　　"He is competent, hardworking, honest and capable of real love....Good-bye, Dounia."

　　Dounia flushed crimson, then suddenly she took alarm.

　　"But what does it mean, brother? Are we really parting for ever thatyou... give me such a parting message?"

　　"Never mind.... Good-bye."

　　He turned away, and walked to the window. She stood a moment, lookedat him uneasily, and went out troubled.

　　No, he was not cold to her. There was an instant (the very last one)when he had longed to take her in his arms and say good-bye to her,and even to tell her, but he had not dared even to touch her hand.

　　"Afterwards she may shudder when she remembers that I embracedher, and will feel that I stole her kiss."

　　"And would she stand that test?" he went on a few minutes later tohimself. "No, she wouldn't; girls like that can't stand things! Theynever do."

　　And he thought of Sonia.

　　There was a breath of fresh air from the window. The daylight wasfading. He took up his cap and went out.

　　He could not, of course, and would not consider how ill he was.But all this continual anxiety and agony of mind could not butaffect him. And if he were not lying in high fever it was perhaps justbecause this continual inner strain helped to keep him on his legs andin possession of his faculties. But this artificial excitement couldnot last long.

　　He wandered aimlessly. The sun was setting. A special form of miseryhad begun to oppress him of late. There was nothing poignant,nothing acute about it; but there was a feeling of permanence, ofeternity about it; it brought a foretaste of hopeless years of thiscold leaden misery, a foretaste of an eternity "on a square yard ofspace." Towards evening this sensation usually began to weigh on himmore heavily.

　　"With this idiotic, purely physical weakness, depending on thesunset or something, one can't help doing something stupid! You'llgo to Dounia, as well as to Sonia," he muttered bitterly.

　　He heard his name called. He looked round. Lebeziatnikov rushed upto him.

　　"Only fancy, I've been to your room looking for you. Only fancy,she's carried out her plan, and taken away the children. SofyaSemyonovna and I have had a job to find them. She is rapping on afrying-pan and making the children dance. The children are crying.They keep stopping at the cross roads and in front of shops; there's acrowd of fools running after them. Come along!"

　　"And Sonia?" Raskolnikov asked anxiously, hurrying afterLebeziatnikov.

　　"Simply frantic. That is, it's not Sofya Semyonovna's frantic, butKaterina Ivanovna, though Sofya Semyonova's frantic too. ButKaterina Ivanovna is absolutely frantic. I tell you she is quitemad. They'll be taken to the police. You can fancy what an effect thatwill have.... They are on the canal bank, near the bridge now, not farfrom Sofya Semyonovna's, quite close."

　　On the canal bank near the bridge and not two houses away from theone where Sonia lodged, there was a crowd of people, consistingprincipally of gutter children. The hoarse broken voice of KaterinaIvanovna could be heard from the bridge, and it certainly was astrange spectacle likely to attract a street crowd. KaterinaIvanovna in her old dress with the green shawl, wearing a torn strawhat, crushed in a hideous way on one side, was really frantic. She wasexhausted and breathless. Her wasted consumptive face looked moresuffering than ever, and indeed out of doors in the sunshine aconsumptive always looks worse than at home. But her excitement didnot flag, and every moment her irritation grew more intense. Sherushed at the children, shouted at them, coaxed them, told them beforethe crowd how to dance and what to sing, began explaining to themwhy it was necessary, and driven to desperation by their notunderstanding, beat them.... Then she would make a rush at thecrowd; if she noticed any decently dressed person stopping to look,she immediately appealed to him to see what these children "from agenteel, one may say aristocratic, house" had been brought to. Ifshe heard laughter or jeering in the crowd, she would rush at onceat the scoffers and begin squabbling with them. Some people laughed,others shook their heads, but every one felt curious at the sight ofthe madwoman with the frightened children. The frying-pan of whichLebeziatnikov had spoken was not there, at least Raskolnikov did notsee it. But instead of rapping on the pan, Katerina Ivanovna beganclapping her wasted hands, when she made Lida and Kolya dance andPolenka sing. She too joined in the singing, but broke down at thesecond note with a fearful cough, which made her curse in despairand even shed tears. What made her most furious was the weeping andterror of Kolya and Lida. Some effort had been made to dress thechildren up as street singers are dressed. The boy had on a turbanmade of something red and white to look like a Turk. There had been nocostume for Lida; she simply had a red knitted cap, or rather anight cap that had belonged to Marmeladov, decorated with a brokenpiece of white ostrich feather, which had been Katerina Ivanovna'sgrandmother's and had been preserved as a family possession. Polenkawas in her everyday dress; she looked in timid perplexity at hermother, and kept at her side, hiding her tears. She dimly realised hermother's condition, and looked uneasily about her. She was terriblyfrightened of the street and the crowd. Sonia followed KaterinaIvanovna, weeping and beseeching her to return home, but KaterinaIvanovna was not to be persuaded.

　　"Leave off, Sonia, leave off," she shouted, speaking fast, pantingand coughing. "You don't know what you ask; you are like a child! I'vetold you before that I am not coming back to that drunken German.Let every one, let all Petersburg see the children begging in thestreets, though their father was an honourable man who served allhis life in truth and fidelity, and one may say died in theservice." (Katerina Ivanovna had by now invented this fantasticstory and thoroughly believed it.) "Let that wretch of a general seeit! And you are silly, Sonia: what have we to eat? Tell me that. Wehave worried you enough, I won't go on so! Ah, Rodion Romanovitch,is that you?" she cried, seeing Raskolnikov and rushing up to him."Explain to this silly girl, please, that nothing better could bedone! Even organ-grinders earn their living, and every one will see atonce that we are different, that we are an honourable and bereavedfamily reduced to beggary. And that general will lose his post, you'llsee! We shall perform under his windows every day, and if the Tsardrives by, I'll fall on my knees, put the children before me, showthem to him, and say 'Defend us, father.' He is the father of thefatherless, he is merciful, he'll protect us, you'll see, and thatwretch of a general.... Lida, tenez vous droite! Kolya, you'll danceagain. Why are you whimpering? Whimpering again! What are you afraidof, stupid? Goodness, what am I to do with them, Rodion Romanovitch?If you only knew how stupid they are! What's one to do with suchchildren?"

　　And she, almost crying herself- which did not stop heruninterrupted, rapid flow of talk- pointed to the crying children.Raskolnikov tried to persuade her to go home, and even said, hoping towork on her vanity, that it was unseemly for her to be wandering aboutthe streets like an organ-grinder, as she was intending to becomethe principal of a boarding-school.

　　"A boarding-school, ha-ha-ha! A castle in the air," cried KaterinaIvanovna, her laugh ending in a cough. "No, Rodion Romanovitch, thatdream is over! All have forsaken us!... And that general.... You know,Rodion Romanovitch, I threw an inkspot at him- it happened to bestanding in the waiting-room by the paper where you sign your name.I wrote my name, threw it at him and ran away. Oh the scoundrels,the scoundrels! But enough of them, now I'll provide for thechildren myself, I won't bow down to anybody! She has had to bearenough for us!" she pointed to Sonia. "Polenka, how much have you got?Show me! What, only two farthings! Oh, the mean wretches! They give usnothing, only run after us, putting their tongues out. There, whatis that blockhead laughing at?" (She pointed to a man in the crowd.)"It's all because Kolya here is so stupid; I have such a bother withhim. What do you want, Polenka? Tell me in French, parlez moifrancais. Why, I've taught you, you know some phrases. Else how areyou to show that you are of good family, well brought-up children, andnot at all like other organ-grinders? We aren't going to have aPunch and Judy show in the street, but to sing a genteel song....Ah, yes,... What are we to sing? You keep putting me out, but we...you see, we are standing here, Rodion Romanovitch, to find somethingto sing and get money, something Kolya can dance to.... For, as youcan fancy, our performance is all impromptu.... We must talk it overand rehearse it all thoroughly, and then we shall go to Nevsky,where there are far more people of good society, and we shall benoticed at once. Lida knows 'My Village' only, nothing but 'MyVillage,' and every one sings that. We must sing something far moregenteel.... Well, have you thought of anything, Polenka? If only you'dhelp your mother! My memory's quite gone, or I should have thoughtof something. We really can't sing 'An Hussar.' Ah, let us sing inFrench, 'Cinq sous,' I have taught it you, I have taught it you. Andas it is in French, people will see at once that you are children ofgood family, and that will be much more touching.... You might sing'Marlborough s'en va-t-en guerre,' for that's quite a child's song andis sung as a lullaby in all the aristocratic houses.-

　　Marlborough s'en va-t-en guerre

　　Ne sait quand reviendra...-

　　she began singing. "But no, better sing 'Cinq sous.' Now, Kolya,your hands on your hips, make haste, and you, Lida, keep turning theother way, and Polenka and I will sing and clap our hands!-

　　Cinq sous, cinq sous

　　Pour monter notre menage.-

　　(Cough-cough-cough!) Set your dress straight, Polenka, it'sslipped down on your shoulders," she observed, panting fromcoughing. "Now it's particularly necessary to behave nicely andgenteelly, that all may see that you are well-born children. I said atthe time that the bodice should be cut longer, and made of two widths.It was your fault, Sonia, with your advice to make it shorter, and nowyou see the child is quite deformed by it.... Why, you're all cryingagain! What's the matter, stupids? Come, Kolya, begin. Make haste,make haste! Oh, what an unbearable child!-

　　Cinq sous, cinq sous.-

　　A policeman again! What do you want?"

　　A policeman was indeed forcing his way through the crowd. But atthat moment a gentleman in civilian uniform and an overcoat- asolid-looking official of about fifty with a decoration on his neck(which delighted Katerina Ivanovna and had its effect on thepoliceman)- approached and without a word handed her a greenthree-rouble note. His face wore a look of genuine sympathy.Katerina Ivanovna took it and gave him a polite, even ceremonious,bow.

　　"I thank you, honoured sir," she began loftily. "The causes thathave induced us (take the money, Polenka: you see there are generousand honourable people who are ready to help a poor gentlewoman indistress). You see, honoured sir, these orphans of good family- Imight even say of aristocratic connections- and that wretch of ageneral sat eating grouse... and stamped at my disturbing him. 'Yourexcellency,' I said, 'protect the orphans, for you knew my latehusband, Semyon Zaharovitch, and on the very day of his death thebasest of scoundrels slandered his only daughter.'... That policemanagain! Protect me," she cried to the official. "Why is thatpoliceman edging up to me? We have only just run away from one ofthem. What do you want, fool?"

　　"It's forbidden in the streets. You mustn't make a disturbance."

　　"It's you're making a disturbance. It's just the same as if I weregrinding an organ. What business is it of yours?"

　　"You have to get a licence for an organ, and you haven't got one,and in that way you collect a crowd. Where do you lodge?"

　　"What, a license?" wailed Katerina Ivanovna. "I buried my husbandto-day. What need of a license?"

　　"Calm yourself, madam, calm yourself," began the official. "Comealong; I will escort you.... This is no place for you in the crowd.You are ill."

　　"Honoured sir, honoured sir, you don't know," screamed KaterinaIvanovna. "We are going to the Nevsky.... Sonia, Sonia! Where isshe? She is crying too! What's the matter with you all? Kolya, Lida,where are you going?" she cried suddenly in alarm. "Oh, sillychildren! Kolya, Lida, where are they off to?..."

　　Kolya and Lida, scared out of their wits by the crowd, and theirmother's mad pranks, suddenly seized each other by the hand, and ranoff at the sight of the policeman who wanted to take them awaysomewhere. Weeping and wailing, poor Katerina Ivanovna ran after them.She was a piteous and unseemly spectacle, as she ran, weeping andpanting for breath. Sonia and Polenka rushed after them.

　　"Bring them back, bring them back, Sonia! Oh stupid, ungratefulchildren!... Polenka! catch them.... It's for your sakes I..."

　　She stumbled as she ran and fell down.

　　"She's cut herself, she's bleeding! Oh, dear!" cried Sonia,bending over her.

　　All ran up and crowded round. Raskolnikov and Lebeziatnikov were thefirst at her side, the official too hastened up, and behind him thepoliceman who muttered, "Bother!" with a gesture of impatience,feeling that the job was going to be a troublesome one.

　　"Pass on! Pass on!" he said to the crowd that pressed forward.

　　"She's dying," some one shouted.

　　"She's gone out of her mind," said another.

　　"Lord have mercy upon us," said a woman, crossing herself. "Havethey caught the little girl and the boy? They're being brought back,the elder one's got them.... Ah, the naughty imps!"

　　When they examined Katerina Ivanovna carefully, they saw that shehad not cut herself against a stone, as Sonia thought, but that theblood that stained the pavement red was from her chest.

　　"I've seen that before," muttered the official to Raskolnikov andLebeziatnikov; "that's consumption; the blood flows and chokes thepatient. I saw the same thing with a relative of my own not longago... nearly a pint of blood, all in a minute.... What's to be donethough? She is dying."

　　"This way, this way, to my room!" Sonia implored. "I live here!...See, that house, the second from here.... Come to me, make haste," sheturned from one to the other. "Send for the doctor! Oh, dear!"

　　Thanks to the official's efforts, this plan was adopted, thepoliceman even helping to carry Katerina Ivanovna. She was carriedto Sonia's room, almost unconscious, and laid on the bed. The bloodwas still flowing, but she seemed to be coming to herself.Raskolnikov, Lebeziatnikov, and the official accompanied Sonia intothe room and were followed by the policeman, who first drove backthe crowd which followed to the very door. Polenka came in holdingKolya and Lida, who were trembling and weeping. Several persons camein too from the Kapernaumovs' room; the landlord, a lame one-eyedman of strange appearance with whiskers and hair that stood up likea brush, his wife, a woman with an everlastingly scared expression,and several open-mouthed children with wonder-struck faces. Amongthese, Svidrigailov suddenly made his appearance. Raskolnikov lookedat him with surprise, not understanding where he had come from and nothaving noticed him in the crowd. A doctor and priest wore spoken of.The official whispered to Raskolnikov that he thought it was toolate now for the doctor, but he ordered him to be sent for.Kapernaumov ran himself.

　　Meanwhile Katerina Ivanovna had regained her breath. The bleedingceased for a time. She looked with sick but intent and penetratingeyes at Sonia, who stood pale and trembling, wiping the sweat from herbrow with a handkerchief. At last she asked to be raised. They sat herup on the bed, supporting her on both sides.

　　"Where are the children?" she said in a faint voice. "You've broughtthem, Polenka? Oh the sillies! Why did you run away.... Och!"

　　Once more her parched lips were covered with blood. She moved hereyes, looking about her.

　　"So that's how you live, Sonia! Never once have I been in yourroom."

　　She looked at her with a face of suffering.

　　"We have been your ruin, Sonia. Polenka, Lida, Kolya, come here!Well, here they are, Sonia, take them all! I hand them over to you,I've had enough! The ball is over. (Cough!) Lay me down, let me die inpeace."

　　They laid her back on the pillow.

　　"What, the priest? I don't want him. You haven't got a rouble tospare. I have no sins. God must forgive me without that. He knowshow I have suffered.... And if He won't forgive me, I don't care!"

　　She sank more and more into uneasy delirium. At times she shuddered,turned her eyes from side to side, recognised every one for aminute, but at once sank into delirium again. Her breathing was hoarseand difficult, there was a sort of rattle in her throat.

　　"I said to him, your excellency," she ejaculated, gasping after eachword. "That Amalia Ludwigovna, ah! Lida, Kolya, hands on your hips,make haste! Glissez, glissez! pas de basque! Tap with your heels, be agraceful child!-

　　Du hast Diamanten und Perlen-

　　What next? That's the thing to sing.-

　　Du hast die schonsten Augen

　　Madchen, was willst du mehr?-

　　"What an idea! Was willst du mehr. What things the fool invents! Ah,yes!-

　　In the heat of midday in the vale of Dagestan.-

　　"Ah, how I loved it! I loved that song to distraction, Polenka! Yourfather, you know, used to sing it when we were engaged.... Oh thosedays! Oh that's the thing for us to sing! How does it go? I'veforgotten. Remind me! How was it?"

　　She was violently excited and tried to sit up. At last, in ahorribly hoarse, broken voice, she began, shrieking and gasping atevery word, with a look of growing terror.

　　"In the heat of midday!... in the vale!... of Dagestan!... With leadin my breast!..."

　　"Your excellency!" she wailed suddenly with a heartrending screamand a flood of tears, "protect the orphans! You have been theirfather's guest... one may say aristocratic...." She started, regainingconsciousness, and gazed at all with a sort of terror, but at oncerecognised Sonia.

　　"Sonia, Sonia!" she articulated softly and caressingly, as thoughsurprised to find her there. "Sonia darling, are you here, too?"

　　They lifted her up again.

　　"Enough! It's over! Farewell, poor thing! I am done for! I ambroken!" she cried with vindictive despair, and her head fellheavily back on the pillow.

　　She sank into unconsciousness again, but this time it did not lastlong. Her pale, yellow, wasted face dropped back, her mouth fell open,her leg moved convulsively, she gave a deep, deep sigh and died.

　　Sonia fell upon her, flung her arms about her, and remainedmotionless with her head pressed to the dead woman's wasted bosom.Polenka threw herself at her mother's feet, kissing them and weepingviolently. Though Kolya and Lida did not understand what had happened,they had a feeling that it was something terrible; they put theirhands on each other's little shoulders, stared straight at one anotherand both at once opened their mouths and began screaming. They wereboth still in their fancy dress; one in a turban, the other in the capwith the ostrich feather.

　　And how did "the certificate of merit" come to be on the bedbeside Katerina Ivanovna? It lay there by the pillow: Raskolnikovsaw it.

　　He walked away to the window. Lebeziatnikov skipped up to him.

　　"She is dead," he said.

　　"Rodion Romanovitch, I must have two words with you," saidSvidrigailov, coming up to them.

　　Lebeziatnikov at once made room for him and delicately withdrew.Svidrigailov drew Raskolnikov further away.

　　"I will undertake all the arrangements, the funeral and that. Youknow it's a question of money and, as I told you, I have plenty tospare. I will put those two little ones and Polenka into some goodorphan asylum, and I will settle fifteen hundred roubles to be paid toeach on coming of age, so that Sofya Semyonovna need have no anxietyabout them. And I will pull her out of the mud too, for she is agood girl, isn't she? So tell Avdotya Romanovna that that is how Iam spending her ten thousand."

　　"What is your motive for such benevolence?" asked Raskolnikov.

　　"Ah! you sceptical person!" laughed Svidrigailov. "I told you Ihad no need of that money. Won't you admit that it's simply donefrom humanity? She wasn't 'a louse,' you know" (he pointed to thecorner where the dead woman lay), "was she, like some old pawnbrokerwoman? Come, you'll agree, is Luzhin to go on living, and doing wickedthings or is she to die? And if I didn't help them, Polenka would gothe same way."

　　He said this with an air of a sort of gay winking slyness, keepinghis eyes fixed on Raskolnikov, who turned white and cold, hearinghis own phrases, spoken to Sonia. He quickly stepped back and lookedwildly at Svidrigailov.

　　"How do you know?" he whispered, hardly able to breathe.

　　"Why, I lodge here at Madame Resslich's, the other side of the wall.Here is Kapernaumov, and there lives Madame Resslich, an old anddevoted friend of mine. I am a neighbour."

　　"You?"

　　"Yes," continued Svidrigailov, shaking with laughter. "I assureyou on my honour, dear Rodion Romanovitch, that you have interested meenormously. I told you we should become friends, I foretold it.Well, here we have. And you will see what an accommodating person Iam. You'll see that you can get on with me!"