　　Nada the Lily

　　by H. Rider Haggard

　　DEDICATION

　　Sompseu:

　　For I will call you by the name that for fifty years has been honouredby every tribe between Zambesi and Cape Agulbas,--I greet you!

　　Sompseu, my father, I have written a book that tells of men andmatters of which you know the most of any who still look upon thelight; therefore, I set your name within that book and, such as it is,I offer it to you.

　　If you knew not Chaka, you and he have seen the same suns shine, youknew his brother Panda and his captains, and perhaps even that veryMopo who tells this tale, his servant, who slew him with the Princes.You have seen the circle of the witch-doctors and the unconquerableZulu impis rushing to war; you have crowned their kings and sharedtheir counsels, and with your son's blood you have expiated astatesman's error and a general's fault.

　　Sompseu, a song has been sung in my ears of how first you masteredthis people of the Zulu. Is it not true, my father, that for longhours you sat silent and alone, while three thousand warriors shoutedfor your life? And when they grew weary, did you not stand and say,pointing towards the ocean: "Kill me if you wish, men of Cetywayo, butI tell you that for every drop of my blood a hundred avengers shallrise from yonder sea!"

　　Then, so it was told me, the regiments turned staring towards theBlack Water, as though the day of Ulundi had already come and they sawthe white slayers creeping across the plains.

　　Thus, Sompseu, your name became great among the people of the Zulu, asalready it was great among many another tribe, and their nobles didyou homage, and they gave you the Bayete, the royal salute, declaringby the mouth of their Council that in you dwelt the spirit of Chaka.

　　Many years have gone by since then, and now you are old, my father. Itis many years even since I was a boy, and followed you when you wentup among the Boers and took their country for the Queen.

　　Why did you do this, my father? I will answer, who know the truth. Youdid it because, had it not been done, the Zulus would have stamped outthe Boers. Were not Cetywayo's impis gathered against the land, andwas it not because it became the Queen's land that at your word hesent them murmuring to their kraals?[1] To save bloodshed you annexedthe country beyond the Vaal. Perhaps it had been better to leave it,since "Death chooses for himself," and after all there was killing--ofour own people, and with the killing, shame. But in those days we didnot guess what we should live to see, and of Majuba we thought only asa little hill!

　　Enemies have borne false witness against you on this matter, Sompseu,you who never erred except through over kindness. Yet what does thatavail? When you have "gone beyond" it will be forgotten, since thesting of ingratitude passes and lies must wither like the winterveldt. Only your name will not be forgotten; as it was heard in lifeso it shall be heard in story, and I pray that, however humbly, minemay pass down with it. Chance has taken me by another path, and I mustleave the ways of action that I love and bury myself in books, but theold days and friends are in my mind, nor while I have memory shall Iforget them and you.

　　Therefore, though it be for the last time, from far across the seas Ispeak to you, and lifting my hand I give your "Sibonga"[2] and thatroyal salute, to which, now that its kings are gone and the "People ofHeaven" are no more a nation, with Her Majesty you are aloneentitled:--

　　Bayete! Baba, Nkosi ya makosi!Ngonyama! Indhlovu ai pendulwa!Wen' o wa vela wasi pata!Wen' o wa hlul' izizwe zonke za patwa nguive!Wa geina nge la Mabun' o wa ba hlul' u yedwa!Umsizi we zintandane e ziblupekayo!Si ya kuleka Baba!Bayete, T' Sompseu![3]

　　and farewell!

　　H. RIDER HAGGARD.

　　To Sir Theophilus Shepstone, K.C.M.G., Natal.13 September, 1891.

　　[1] "I thank my father Sompseu for his message. I am glad that he hassent it, because the Dutch have tired me out, and I intended tofight them once and once only, and to drive them over the Vaal.Kabana, you see my impis are gathered. It was to fight the DutchI called them together; now I send them back to their homes."--Message from Cetywayo to Sir. T. Shepstone, April, 1877.

　　[2] Titles of praise.

　　[3] Bayete, Father, Chief of Chiefs!Lion! Elephant that is not turned!You who nursed us from of old!You who overshadowed all peoples and took charge of them,And ended by mastering the Boers with your single strength!Help of the fatherless when in trouble!Salutation to you, Father!Bayete, O Sompseu!

　　PREFACE

　　The writer of this romance has been encouraged to his task by apurpose somewhat beyond that of setting out a wild tale of savagelife. When he was yet a lad,--now some seventeen years ago,--fortunetook him to South Africa. There he was thrown in with men who, forthirty or forty years, had been intimately acquainted with the Zulupeople, with their history, their heroes, and their customs. Fromthese he heard many tales and traditions, some of which, perhaps, arerarely told nowadays, and in time to come may cease to be toldaltogether. Then the Zulus were still a nation; now that nation hasbeen destroyed, and the chief aim of its white rulers is to root outthe warlike spirit for which it was remarkable, and to replace it by aspirit of peaceful progress. The Zulu military organisation, perhapsthe most wonderful that the world has seen, is already a thing of thepast; it perished at Ulundi. It was Chaka who invented thatorganisation, building it up from the smallest beginnings. When heappeared at the commencement of this century, it was as the ruler of asingle small tribe; when he fell, in the year 1828, beneath theassegais of his brothers, Umhlangana and Dingaan, and of his servant,Mopo or Umbopo, as he is called also, all south-eastern Africa was athis feet, and in his march to power he had slaughtered more than amillion human beings. An attempt has been made in these pages to setout the true character of this colossal genius and most evil man,--aNapoleon and a Tiberiius in one,--and also that of his brother andsuccessor, Dingaan, so no more need be said of them here. The author'saim, moreover, has been to convey, in a narrative form, some idea ofthe remarkable spirit which animated these kings and their subjects,and to make accessible, in a popular shape, incidents of history whichare now, for the most part, only to be found in a few scarce works ofreference, rarely consulted, except by students. It will be obviousthat such a task has presented difficulties, since he who undertakesit must for a time forget his civilisation, and think with the mindand speak with the voice of a Zulu of the old regime. All the horrorsperpetrated by the Zulu tyrants cannot be published in this polite ageof melanite and torpedoes; their details have, therefore, beensuppressed. Still much remains, and those who think it wrong thatmassacre and fighting should be written of,--except by specialcorrespondents,--or that the sufferings of mankind beneath one of theworld's most cruel tyrannies should form the groundwork of romance,may be invited to leave this book unread. Most, indeed nearly all, ofthe historical incidents here recorded are substantially true. Thus,it is said that Chaka did actually kill his mother, Unandi, for thereason given, and destroy an entire tribe in the Tatiyana cleft, andthat he prophesied of the coming of the white man after receiving hisdeath wounds. Of the incident of the Missionary and the furnace oflogs, it is impossible to speak so certainly. It came to the writerfrom the lips of an old traveller in "the Zulu"; but he cannotdiscover any confirmation of it. Still, these kings undoubtedly puttheir soldiers to many tests of equal severity. Umbopo, or Mopo, as heis named in this tale, actually lived. After he had stabbed Chaka, herose to great eminence. Then he disappears from the scene, but it isnot accurately known whether he also went "the way of the assegai," orperhaps, as is here suggested, came to live near Stanger under thename of Zweete. The fate of the two lovers at the mouth of the cave isa true Zulu tale, which has been considerably varied to suit thepurposes of this romance. The late Mr. Leslie, who died in 1874, tellsit in his book "Among the Zulus and Amatongas." "I heard a story theother day," he says, "which, if the power of writing fiction werepossessed by me, I might have worked up into a first-class sensationalnovel." It is the story that has been woven into the plot of thisbook. To him also the writer is indebted for the artifice by whichUmslopogaas obtained admission to the Swazi stronghold; it was told toMr. Leslie by the Zulu who performed the feat and thereby won a wife.Also the writer's thanks are due to his friends, Mr. F. B. Fynney,[1]late Zulu border agent, for much information given to him in bygoneyears by word of mouth, and more recently through his pamphlet"Zululand and the Zulus," and to Mr. John Bird, formerly treasurer tothe Government of Natal, whose compilation, "The Annals of Natal," isinvaluable to all who would study the early history of that colony andof Zululand.

　　As for the wilder and more romantic incidents of this story, such asthe hunting of Umslopogaas and Galazi with the wolves, or rather withthe hyaenas,--for there are no true wolves in Zululand,--the authorcan only say that they seem to him of a sort that might well have beenmythically connected with the names of those heroes. Similar beliefsand traditions are common in the records of primitive peoples. Theclub "Watcher of the Fords," or, to give its Zulu name, U-nothlola-mazibuko, is an historical weapon, chronicled by Bishop Callaway. Itwas once owned by a certain Undhlebekazizwa. He was an arbitraryperson, for "no matter what was discussed in our village, he wouldbring it to a conclusion with a stick." But he made a good end; forwhen the Zulu soldiers attacked him, he killed no less than twenty ofthem with the Watcher, and the spears stuck in him "as thick as reedsin a morass." This man's strength was so great that he could kill aleopard "like a fly," with his hands only, much as Umslopogaas slewthe traitor in this story.

　　Perhaps it may be allowable to add a few words about the Zulumysticism, magic, and superstition, to which there is some allusion inthis romance. It has been little if at all exaggerated. Thus thewriter well remembers hearing a legend how the Guardian Spirit of theAma-Zulu was seen riding down the storm. Here is what Mr. Fynney saysof her in the pamphlet to which reference has been made: "The nativeshave a spirit which they call Nomkubulwana, or the Inkosazana-ye-Zulu(the Princess of Heaven). She is said to be robed in white, and totake the form of a young maiden, in fact an angel. She is said toappear to some chosen person, to whom she imparts some revelation;but, whatever that revelation may be, it is kept a profound secretfrom outsiders. I remember that, just before the Zulu war,Nomkubulwana appeared, revealing something or other which had a greateffect throughout the land, and I know that the Zulus were quiteimpressed that some calamity was about to befall them. One of theominous signs was that fire is said to have descended from heaven, andignited the grass over the graves of the former kings of Zululand.. . . On another occasion Nomkubulwana appeared to some one inZululand, the result of that visit being, that the native women buriedtheir young children up to their heads in sand, deserting them for thetime being, going away weeping, but returning at nightfall to unearththe little ones again."

　　For this divine personage there is, therefore, authority, and the samemay be said of most of the supernatural matters spoken of in thesepages. The exact spiritual position held in the Zulu mind by theUmkulunkulu,--the Old--Old,--the Great--Great,--the Lord of Heavens,--is a more vexed question, and for its proper consideration the readermust be referred to Bishop Callaway's work, the "Religious System ofthe Amazulu." Briefly, Umkulunkulu's character seems to vary from theidea of an ancestral spirit, or the spirit of an ancestor, to that ofa god. In the case of an able and highly intelligent person like theMopo of this story, the ideal would probably not be a low one;therefore he is made to speak of Umkulunkulu as the Great Spirit, orGod.

　　It only remains to the writer to express his regret that this story isnot more varied in its hue. It would have been desirable to introducesome gayer and more happy incidents. But it has not been possible. Itis believed that the picture given of the times is a faithful one,though it may be open to correction in some of its details. At theleast, the aged man who tells the tale of his wrongs and vengeancecould not be expected to treat his subject in an optimistic or even ina cheerful vein.

　　[1] I grieve to state that I must now say the late Mr. F. B. Fynney.

　　NADA THE LILY

　　INTRODUCTION

　　Some years since--it was during the winter before the Zulu War--aWhite Man was travelling through Natal. His name does not matter, forhe plays no part in this story. With him were two wagons laden withgoods, which he was transporting to Pretoria. The weather was cold andthere was little or no grass for the oxen, which made the journeydifficult; but he had been tempted to it by the high rates oftransport that prevailed at that season of the year, which wouldremunerate him for any probable loss he might suffer in cattle. So hepushed along on his journey, and all went well until he had passed thelittle town of Stanger, once the site of Duguza, the kraal of Chaka,the first Zulu king and the uncle of Cetywayo. The night after he leftStanger the air turned bitterly cold, heavy grey clouds filled thesky, and hid the light of the stars.

　　"Now if I were not in Natal, I should say that there was a heavy fallof snow coming," said the White Man to himself. "I have often seen thesky look like that in Scotland before snow." Then he reflected thatthere had been no deep snow in Natal for years, and, having drunk a"tot" of squareface and smoked his pipe, he went to bed beneath theafter-tent of his larger wagon.

　　During the night he was awakened by a sense of bitter cold and the lowmoaning of the oxen that were tied to the trek-tow, every ox in itsplace. He thrust his head through the curtain of the tent and lookedout. The earth was white with snow, and the air was full of it, sweptalong by a cutting wind.

　　Now he sprang up, huddling on his clothes and as he did so calling tothe Kaffirs who slept beneath the wagons. Presently they awoke fromthe stupor which already was beginning to overcome them, and creptout, shivering with cold and wrapped from head to foot in blankets.

　　"Quick! you boys," he said to them in Zulu; "quick! Would you see thecattle die of the snow and wind? Loose the oxen from the trek-tows anddrive them in between the wagons; they will give them some shelter."And lighting a lantern he sprang out into the snow.

　　At last it was done--no easy task, for the numbed hands of the Kaffirscould scarcely loosen the frozen reims. The wagons were outspannedside by side with a space between them, and into this space the mob ofthirty-six oxen was driven and there secured by reims tied crosswisefrom the front and hind wheels of the wagons. Then the White Man creptback to his bed, and the shivering natives, fortified with gin, orsquareface, as it is called locally, took refuge on the second wagon,drawing a tent-sail over them.

　　For awhile there was silence, save for the moaning of the huddled andrestless cattle.

　　"If the snow goes on I shall lose my oxen," he said to himself; "theycan never bear this cold."

　　Hardly had the words passed his lips when the wagon shook; there was asound of breaking reims and trampling hoofs. Once more he looked out.The oxen had "skrecked" in a mob. There they were, running away intothe night and the snow, seeking to find shelter from the cold. In aminute they had vanished utterly. There was nothing to be done, exceptwait for the morning.

　　At last it came, revealing a landscape blind with snow. Such search ascould be made told them nothing. The oxen had gone, and their spoorwas obliterated by the fresh-fallen flakes. The White Man called acouncil of his Kaffir servants. "What was to be done?" he asked.

　　One said this thing, one that, but all agreed that they must wait toact until the snow melted.

　　"Or till we freeze, you whose mothers were fools!" said the White Man,who was in the worst of tempers, for had he not lost four hundredpounds' worth of oxen?

　　Then a Zulu spoke, who hitherto had remained silent. He was the driverof the first wagon.

　　"My father," he said to the White Man, "this is my word. The oxen arelost in the snow. No man knows whither they have gone, or whether theylive or are now but hides and bones. Yet at the kraal yonder," and hepointed to some huts about two miles away on the hillside, "lives awitch doctor named Zweete. He is old--very old--but he has wisdom, andhe can tell you where the oxen are if any man may, my father."

　　"Stuff!" answered the White Man. "Still, as the kraal cannot be colderthan this wagon, we will go and ask Zweete. Bring a bottle ofsquareface and some snuff with you for presents."

　　An hour later he stood in the hut of Zweete. Before him was a veryancient man, a mere bag of bones, with sightless eyes, and one hand--his left--white and shrivelled.

　　"What do you seek of Zweete, my white father?" asked the old man in athin voice. "You do not believe in me and my wisdom; why should I helpyou? Yet I will do it, though it is against your law, and you do wrongto ask me,--yes, to show you that there is truth in us Zulu doctors, Iwill help you. My father, I know what you seek. You seek to know whereyour oxen have run for shelter from the cold! Is it not so?"

　　"It is so, Doctor," answered the White Man. "You have long ears."

　　"Yes, my white father, I have long ears, though they say that I growdeaf. I have keen eyes also, and yet I cannot see your face. Let mehearken! Let me look!"

　　For awhile he was silent, rocking himself to and fro, then he spoke:"You have a farm, White Man, down near Pine Town, is it not? Ah! Ithought so--and an hour's ride from your farm lives a Boer with fourfingers only on his right hand. There is a kloof on the Boer's farmwhere mimosa-trees grow. There, in the kloof, you shall find your oxen--yes, five days' journey from here you will find them all. I say all,my father, except three only--the big black Africander ox, the littlered Zulu ox with one horn, and the speckled ox. You shall not findthese, for they have died in the snow. Send, and you will find theothers. No, no! I ask no fee! I do not work wonders for reward. Whyshould I? I am rich."

　　Now the White Man scoffed. But in the end, so great is the power ofsuperstition, he sent. And here it may be stated that on the eleventhday of his sojourn at the kraal of Zweete, those whom he sent returnedwith the oxen, except the three only. After that he scoffed no more.Those eleven days he spent in a hut of the old man's kraal, and everyafternoon he came and talked with him, sitting far into the night.

　　On the third day he asked Zweete how it was that his left hand waswhite and shrivelled, and who were Umslopogaas and Nada, of whom hehad let fall some words. Then the old man told him the tale that isset out here. Day by day he told some of it till it was finished. Itis not all written in these pages, for portions may have beenforgotten, or put aside as irrelevant. Neither has it been possiblefor the writer of it to render the full force of the Zulu idiom nor toconvey a picture of the teller. For, in truth, he acted rather thantold his story. Was the death of a warrior in question, he stabbedwith his stick, showing how the blow fell and where; did the storygrow sorrowful, he groaned, or even wept. Moreover, he had manyvoices, one for each of the actors in his tale. This man, ancient andwithered, seemed to live again in the far past. It was the past thatspoke to his listener, telling of deeds long forgotten, of deeds thatare no more known.

　　Yet as he best may, the White Man has set down the substance of thestory of Zweete in the spirit in which Zweete told it. And because thehistory of Nada the Lily and of those with whom her life wasintertwined moved him strangely, and in many ways, he has done more,he has printed it that others may judge of it.

　　And now his part is played. Let him who was named Zweete, but who hadanother name, take up the story.

　　CHAPTER I

　　THE BOY CHAKA PROPHESIES

　　You ask me, my father, to tell you the tale of the youth ofUmslopogaas, holder of the iron Chieftainess, the axe Groan-maker, whowas named Bulalio the Slaughterer, and of his love for Nada, the mostbeautiful of Zulu women. It is long; but you are here for many nights,and, if I live to tell it, it shall be told. Strengthen your heart, myfather, for I have much to say that is sorrowful, and even now, when Ithink of Nada the tears creep through the horn that shuts out my oldeyes from light.

　　Do you know who I am, my father? You do not know. You think that I aman old, old witch-doctor named Zweete. So men have thought for manyyears, but that is not my name. Few have known it, for I have kept itlocked in my breast, lest, thought I live now under the law of theWhite Man, and the Great Queen is my chieftainess, an assegai stillmight find this heart did any know my name.

　　Look at this hand, my father--no, not that which is withered withfire; look on this right hand of mine. You see it, though I who amblind cannot. But still, within me, I see it as it was once. Ay! I seeit red and strong--red with the blood of two kings. Listen, my father;bend your ear to me and listen. I am Mopo--ah! I felt you start; youstart as the regiment of the Bees started when Mopo walked beforetheir ranks, and from the assegai in his hand the blood of Chaka[1]dropped slowly to the earth. I am Mopo who slew Chaka the king. Ikilled him with Dingaan and Umhlangana the princes; but the wound wasmine that his life crept out of, and but for me he would never havebeen slain. I killed him with the princes, but Dingaan, I and oneother slew alone.

　　[1] The Zulu Napoleon, one of the greatest geniuses and most wickedmen who ever lived. He was killed in the year 1828, havingslaughtered more than a million human beings.--ED.

　　What do you say? "Dingaan died by the Tongola."

　　Yes, yes, he died, but not there; he died on the Ghost Mountain; helies in the breast of the old Stone Witch who sits aloft foreverwaiting for the world to perish. But I also was on the Ghost Mountain.In those days my feet still could travel fast, and vengeance would notlet me sleep. I travelled by day, and by night I found him. I andanother, we killed him--ah! ah!

　　Why do I tell you this? What has it to do with the loves ofUmslopogaas and Nada the Lily? I will tell you. I stabbed Chaka forthe sake of my sister, Baleka, the mother of Umslopogaas, and becausehe had murdered my wives and children. I and Umslopogaas slew Dingaanfor the sake of Nada, who was my daughter.

　　There are great names in the story, my father. Yes, many have heardthe names: when the Impis roared them out as they charged in battle, Ihave felt the mountains shake and seen the waters quiver in theirsound. But where are they now? Silence has them, and the white menwrite them down in books. I opened the gates of distance for theholders of the names. They passed through and they are gone beyond. Icut the strings that tied them to the world. They fell off. Ha! ha!They fell off! Perhaps they are falling still, perhaps they creepabout their desolate kraals in the skins of snakes. I wish I knew thesnakes that I might crush them with my heel. Yonder, beneath us, atthe burying place of kings, there is a hole. In that hole lies thebones of Chaka, the king who died for Baleka. Far away in Zululandthere is a cleft upon the Ghost Mountain. At the foot of that cleftlie the bones of Dingaan, the king who died for Nada. It was far tofall and he was heavy; those bones of his are broken into littlepieces. I went to see them when the vultures and the jackals had donetheir work. And then I laughed three times and came here to die.

　　All that is long ago, and I have not died; though I wish to die andfollow the road that Nada trod. Perhaps I have lived to tell you thistale, my father, that you may repeat it to the white men if you will.How old am I? Nay, I do not know. Very, very old. Had Chaka lived hewould have been as old as I.[2] None are living whom I knew when I wasa boy. I am so old that I must hasten. The grass withers, and thewinter comes. Yes, while I speak the winter nips my heart. Well, I amready to sleep in the cold, and perhaps I shall awake again in thespring.

　　[2] This would have made him nearly a hundred years old, an age rarelyattained by a native. The writer remembers talking to an aged Zuluwoman, however, who told him that she was married when Chaka wasking.--ED.

　　Before the Zulus were a people--for I will begin at the beginning--Iwas born of the Langeni tribe. We were not a large tribe; afterwards,all our able-bodied men numbered one full regiment in Chaka's army,perhaps there were between two and three thousand of them, but theywere brave. Now they are all dead, and their women and children withthem,--that people is no more. It is gone like last month's moon; howit went I will tell you by-and-bye.

　　Our tribe lived in a beautiful open country; the Boers, whom we callthe Amaboona, are there now, they tell me. My father, Makedama, waschief of the tribe, and his kraal was built on the crest of a hill,but I was not the son of his head wife. One evening, when I was stilllittle, standing as high as a man's elbow only, I went out with mymother below the cattle kraal to see the cows driven in. My mother wasvery fond of these cows, and there was one with a white face thatwould follow her about. She carried my little sister Baleka riding onher hip; Baleka was a baby then. We walked till we met the ladsdriving in the cows. My mother called the white-faced cow and gave itmealie leaves which she had brought with her. Then the boys went onwith the cattle, but the white-faced cow stopped by my mother. Shesaid that she would bring it to the kraal when she came home. Mymother sat down on the grass and nursed her baby, while I played roundher, and the cow grazed. Presently we saw a woman walking towards usacross the plain. She walked like one who is tired. On her back was abundle of mats, and she led by the hand a boy of about my own age, butbigger and stronger than I was. We waited a long while, till at lastthe woman came up to us and sank down on the veldt, for she was veryweary. We saw by the way her hair was dressed that she was not of ourtribe.

　　"Greeting to you!" said the woman.

　　"Good-morrow!" answered my mother. "What do you seek?"

　　"Food, and a hut to sleep in," said the woman. "I have travelled far."

　　"How are you named?--and what is your people?" asked my mother.

　　"My name is Unandi: I am the wife of Senzangacona, of the Zulu tribe,"said the stranger.

　　Now there had been war between our people and the Zulu people, andSenzangacona had killed some of our warriors and taken many of ourcattle. So, when my mother heard the speech of Unandi she sprang up inanger.

　　"You dare to come here and ask me for food and shelter, wife of a dogof a Zulu!" she cried; "begone, or I will call the girls to whip youout of our country."

　　The woman, who was very handsome, waited till my mother had finishedher angry words; then she looked up and spoke slowly, "There is a cowby you with milk dropping from its udder; will you not even give meand my boy a gourd of milk?" And she took a gourd from her bundle andheld it towards us.

　　"I will not," said my mother.

　　"We are thirsty with long travel; will you not, then, give us a cup ofwater? We have found none for many hours."

　　"I will not, wife of a dog; go and seek water for yourself."

　　The woman's eyes filled with tears, but the boy folded his arms on hisbreast and scowled. He was a very handsome boy, with bright blackeyes, but when he scowled his eyes were like the sky before athunderstorm.

　　"Mother," he said, "we are not wanted here any more than we werewanted yonder," and he nodded towards the country where the Zulupeople lived. "Let us be going to Dingiswayo; the Umtetwa people willprotect us."

　　"Yes, let us be going, my son," answered Unandi; "but the path islong, we are weary and shall fall by the way."

　　I heard, and something pulled at my heart; I was sorry for the womanand her boy, they looked so tired. Then, without saying anything to mymother, I snatched the gourd and ran with it to a little donga thatwas hard by, for I knew that there was a spring. Presently I came backwith the gourd full of water. My mother wanted to catch me, for shewas very angry, but I ran past her and gave the gourd to the boy. Thenmy mother ceased trying to interfere, only she beat the woman with hertongue all the while, saying that evil had come to our kraals from herhusband, and she felt in her heart that more evil would come upon usfrom her son. Her Ehlose[3] told her so. Ah! my father, her Ehlosetold her true. If the woman Unandi and her child had died that day onthe veldt, the gardens of my people would not now be a wilderness, andtheir bones would not lie in the great gulley that is nearU'Cetywayo's kraal.

　　[3] Guardian spirit.--ED.

　　While my mother talked I and the cow with the white face stood stilland watched, and the baby Baleka cried aloud. The boy, Unandi's son,having taken the gourd, did not offer the water to his mother. Hedrank two-thirds of it himself; I think that he would have drunk itall had not his thirst been slaked; but when he had done he gave whatwas left to his mother, and she finished it. Then he took the gourdagain, and came forward, holding it in one hand; in the other hecarried a short stick.

　　"What is your name, boy?" he said to me as a big rich man speaks toone who is little and poor.

　　"Mopo is my name," I answered.

　　"And what is the name of your people?"

　　I told him the name of my tribe, the Langeni tribe.

　　"Very well, Mopo; now I will tell you my name. My name is Chaka, sonof Senzangacona, and my people are called the Amazulu. And I will tellyou something more. I am little to-day, and my people are a smallpeople. But I shall grow big, so big that my head will be lost in theclouds; you will look up and you shall not see it. My face will blindyou; it will be bright like the sun; and my people will grow greatwith me; they shall eat up the whole world. And when I am big and mypeople are big, and we have stamped the earth flat as far as men cantravel, then I will remember your tribe--the tribe of the Langeni, whowould not give me and my mother a cup of milk when we were weary. Yousee this gourd; for every drop it can hold the blood of a man shallflow--the blood of one of your men. But because you gave me the waterI will spare you, Mopo, and you only, and make you great under me. Youshall grow fat in my shadow. You alone I will never harm, however yousin against me; this I swear. But for that woman," and he pointed tomy mother, "let her make haste and die, so that I do not need to teachher what a long time death can take to come. I have spoken." And heground his teeth and shook his stick towards us.

　　My mother stood silent awhile. Then she gasped out: "The little liar!He speaks like a man, does he? The calf lows like a bull. I will teachhim another note--the brat of an evil prophet!" And putting downBaleka, she ran at the boy.

　　Chaka stood quite still till she was near; then suddenly he lifted thestick in his hand, and hit her so hard on the head that she fell down.After that he laughed, turned, and went away with his mother Unandi.

　　These, my father, were the first words I heard Chaka speak, and theywere words of prophecy, and they came true. The last words I heard himspeak were words of prophecy also, and I think that they will cometrue. Even now they are coming true. In the one he told how the Zulupeople should rise. And say, have they not risen? In the other hetold how they should fall; and they did fall. Do not the white mengather themselves together even now against U'Cetywayo, as vulturesgather round a dying ox? The Zulus are not what they were to standagainst them. Yes, yes, they will come true, and mine is the song of apeople that is doomed.

　　But of these other words I will speak in their place.

　　I went to my mother. Presently she raised herself from the ground andsat up with her hands over her face. The blood from the wound thestick had made ran down her face on to her breast, and I wiped it awaywith grass. She sat for a long while thus, while the child cried, thecow lowed to be milked, and I wiped up the blood with the grass. Atlast she took her hands away and spoke to me.

　　"Mopo, my son," she said, "I have dreamed a dream. I dreamed that Isaw the boy Chaka who struck me: he was grown like a giant. He stalkedacross the mountains and the veldt, his eyes blazed like thelightning, and in his hand he shook a little assegai that was red withblood. He caught up people after people in his hands and tore them, hestamped their kraals flat with his feet. Before him was the green ofsummer, behind him the land was black as when the fires have eaten thegrass. I saw our people, Mopo; they were many and fat, their heartslaughed, the men were brave, the girls were fair; I counted theirchildren by the hundreds. I saw them again, Mopo. They were bones,white bones, thousands of bones tumbled together in a rocky place, andhe, Chaka, stood over the bones and laughed till the earth shook.Then, Mopo, in my dream, I saw you grown a man. You alone were left ofour people. You crept up behind the giant Chaka, and with you cameothers, great men of a royal look. You stabbed him with a littlespear, and he fell down and grew small again; he fell down and cursedyou. But you cried in his ear a name--the name of Baleka, your sister--and he died. Let us go home, Mopo, let us go home; the darknessfalls."

　　So we rose and went home. But I held my peace, for I was afraid, verymuch afraid.

　　CHAPTER II

　　MOPO IS IN TROUBLE

　　Now, I must tell how my mother did what the boy Chaka had told her,and died quickly. For where his stick had struck her on the foreheadthere came a sore that would not be healed, and in the sore grew anabscess, and the abscess ate inwards till it came to the brain. Thenmy mother fell down and died, and I cried very much, for I loved her,and it was dreadful to see her cold and stiff, with not a word to sayhowever loudly I called to her. Well, they buried my mother, and shewas soon forgotten. I only remembered her, nobody else did--not evenBaleka, for she was too little--and as for my father he took anotheryoung wife and was content. After that I was unhappy, for my brothersdid not love me, because I was much cleverer than they, and hadgreater skill with the assegai, and was swifter in running; so theypoisoned the mind of my father against me and he treated me badly. ButBaleka and I loved each other, for we were both lonely, and she clungto me like a creeper to the only tree in a plain, and though I wasyoung, I learned this: that to be wise is to be strong, for though hewho holds the assegai kills, yet he whose mind directs the battle isgreater than he who kills. Now I saw that the witch-finders and themedicine-men were feared in the land, and that everybody looked up tothem, so that, even when they had only a stick in their hands, ten menarmed with spears would fly before them. Therefore I determined that Ishould be a witch-doctor, for they alone can kill those whom they hatewith a word. So I learned the arts of the medicine-men. I madesacrifices, I fasted in the veldt alone, I did all those things ofwhich you have heard, and I learned much; for there is wisdom in ourmagic as well as lies--and you know it, my father, else you had notcome here to ask me about your lost oxen.

　　So things went on till I was twenty years of age--a man full grown. Bynow I had mastered all I could learn by myself, so I joined myself onto the chief medicine-man of our tribe, who was named Noma. He wasold, had one eye only, and was very clever. Of him I learned sometricks and more wisdom, but at last he grew jealous of me and set atrap to catch me. As it chanced, a rich man of a neighbouring tribehad lost some cattle, and came with gifts to Noma praying him to smellthem out. Noma tried and could not find them; his vision failed him.Then the headman grew angry and demanded back his gifts; but Nomawould not give up that which he once had held, and hot words passed.The headman said that he would kill Noma; Noma said that he wouldbewitch the headman.

　　"Peace," I said, for I feared that blood would be shed. "Peace, andlet me see if my snake will tell me where the cattle are."

　　"You are nothing but a boy," answered the headman. "Can a boy havewisdom?"

　　"That shall soon be known," I said, taking the bones in my hand.[1]

　　[1] The Kafir witch-doctors use the knuckle-bones of animals in theirmagic rites, throwing them something as we throw dice.--ED.

　　"Leave the bones alone!" screamed Noma. "We will ask nothing more ofour snakes for the good of this son of a dog."

　　"He shall throw the bones," answered the headman. "If you try to stophim, I will let sunshine through you with my assegai." And he liftedhis spear.

　　Then I made haste to begin; I threw the bones. The headman sat on theground before me and answered my questions. You know of these matters,my father--how sometimes the witch-doctor has knowledge of where thelost things are, for our ears are long, and sometimes his Ehlose tellshim, as but the other day it told me of your oxen. Well, in this case,my snake stood up. I knew nothing of the man's cattle, but my Spiritwas with me and soon I saw them all, and told them to him one by one,their colour, their age--everything. I told him, too, where they were,and how one of them had fallen into a stream and lay there on its backdrowned, with its forefoot caught in a forked root. As my Ehlose toldme so I told the headman.

　　Now, the man was pleased, and said that if my sight was good, and hefound the cattle, the gifts should be taken from Noma and given to me;and he asked the people who were sitting round, and there were many,if this was not just. "Yes, yes," they said, it was just, and theywould see that it was done. But Noma sat still and looked at meevilly. He knew that I had made a true divination, and he was veryangry. It was a big matter: the herd of cattle were many, and, if theywere found where I had said, then all men would think me the greaterwizard. Now it was late, and the moon had not yet risen, therefore theheadman said that he would sleep that night in our kraal, and at thefirst light would go with me to the spot where I said the cattle were.After that he went away.

　　I too went into my hut and lay down to sleep. Suddenly I awoke,feeling a weight upon my breast. I tried to start up, but somethingcold pricked my throat. I fell back again and looked. The door of thehut was open, the moon lay low on the sky like a ball of fire faraway. I could see it through the door, and its light crept into thehut. It fell upon the face of Noma the witch-doctor. He was seatedacross me, glaring at me with his one eye, and in his hand was aknife. It was that which I had felt prick my throat.

　　"You whelp whom I have bred up to tear me!" he hissed into my ear,"you dared to divine where I failed, did you? Very well, now I willshow you how I serve such puppies. First, I will pierce through theroot of your tongue, so that you cannot squeal, then I will cut you topieces slowly, bit by bit, and in the morning I will tell the peoplethat the spirits did it because you lied. Next, I will take off yourarms and legs. Yes, yes, I will make you like a stick! Then I will"--and he began driving in the knife under my chin.

　　"Mercy, my uncle," I said, for I was frightened and the knife hurt."Have mercy, and I will do whatever you wish!"

　　"Will you do this?" he asked, still pricking me with the knife. "Willyou get up, go to find the dog's cattle and drive them to a certainplace, and hide them there?" And he named a secret valley that wasknown to very few. "If you do that, I will spare you and give youthree of the cows. If you refuse or play my false, then, by myfather's spirit, I will find a way to kill you!"

　　"Certainly I will do it, my uncle," I answered. "Why did you not trustme before? Had I known that you wanted to keep the cattle, I wouldnever have smelt them out. I only did so fearing lest you should losethe presents."

　　"You are not so wicked as I thought," he growled. "Get up, then, anddo my bidding. You can be back here two hours after dawn."

　　So I got up, thinking all the while whether I should try to spring onhim. But I was without arms, and he had the knife; also if, by chance,I prevailed and killed him, it would have been thought that I hadmurdered him, and I should have tasted the assegai. So I made anotherplan. I would go and find the cattle in the valley where I had smeltthem out, but I would not bring them to the secret hiding-place. No; Iwould drive them straight to the kraal, and denounce Noma before thechief, my father, and all the people. But I was young in those days,and did not know the heart of Noma. He had not been a witch-doctortill he grew old for nothing. Oh! he was evil!--he was cunning as ajackal, and fierce like a lion.. He had planted me by him like a tree,but he meant to keep me clipped like a bush. Now I had grown tall andovershadowed him; therefore he would root me up.

　　I went to the corner of my hut, Noma watching me all the while, andtook a kerrie and my small shield. Then I started through themoonlight. Till I was past the kraal I glided along quietly as ashadow. After that, I began to run, singing to myself as I went, tofrighten away the ghosts, my father.

　　For an hour I travelled swiftly over the plain, till I came to thehillside where the bush began. Here it was very dark under the shadeof the trees, and I sang louder than ever. At last I found the littlebuffalo path I sought, and turned along it. Presently I came to anopen place, where the moonlight crept in between the trees. I kneltdown and looked. Yes! my snake had not lied to me; there was the spoorof the cattle. Then I went on gladly till I reached a dell throughwhich the water ran softly, sometimes whispering and sometimes talkingout loud. Here the trail of the cattle was broad: they had broken downthe ferns with their feet and trampled the grass. Presently I came toa pool. I knew it--it was the pool my snake had shown me. And there atthe edge of the pool floated the drowned ox, its foot caught in aforked root. All was just as I had seen it in my heart.

　　I stepped forward and looked round. My eye caught something; it wasthe faint grey light of the dawn glinted on the cattle's horns. As Ilooked, one of them snorted, rose and shook the dew from his hide. Heseemed big as an elephant in the mist and twilight.

　　Then I collected them all--there were seventeen--and drove them beforeme down the narrow path back towards the kraal. Now the daylight camequickly, and the sun had been up an hour when I reached the spot whereI must turn if I wished to hide the cattle in the secret place, asNoma had bid me. But I would not do this. No, I would go on to thekraal with them, and tell all men that Noma was a thief. Still, I satdown and rested awhile, for I was tired. As I sat, I heard a noise,and looked up. There, over the slope of the rise, came a crowd of men,and leading them was Noma, and by his side the headman who owned thecattle. I rose and stood still, wondering; but as I stood, they rantowards me shouting and waving sticks and spears.

　　"There he is!" screamed Noma. "There he is!--the clever boy whom Ihave brought up to bring shame on me. What did I tell you? Did I nottell you that he was a thief? Yes--yes! I know your tricks, Mopo, mychild! See! he is stealing the cattle! He knew where they were all thetime, and now he is taking them away to hide them. They would beuseful to buy a wife with, would they not, my clever boy?" And he madea rush at me, with his stick lifted, and after him came the headman,grunting with rage.

　　I understood now, my father. My heart went mad in me, everything beganto swim round, a red cloth seemed to lift itself up and down before myeyes. I have always seen it thus when I was forced to fight. Iscreamed out one word only, "Liar!" and ran to meet him. On came Noma.He struck at me with his stick, but I caught the blow upon my littleshield, and hit back. Wow! I did hit! The skull of Noma met my kerrie,and down he fell dead at my feet. I yelled again, and rushed on at theheadman. He threw an assegai, but it missed me, and next second I hithim too. He got up his shield, but I knocked it down upon his head,and over he rolled senseless. Whether he lived or died I do not know,my father; but his head being of the thickest, I think it likely thathe lived. Then, while the people stood astonished, I turned and fledlike the wind. They turned too, and ran after me, throwing spears atme and trying to cut me off. But none of them could catch me--no, notone. I went like the wind; I went like a buck when the dogs wake itfrom sleep; and presently the sound of their chase grew fainter andfainter, till at last I was out of sight and alone.

　　CHAPTER III

　　MOPO VENTURES HOME

　　I threw myself down on the grass and panted till my breath came back;then I went and hid in a patch of reeds down by a swamp. All day longI lay there thinking. What was I to do? Now I was a jackal without ahole. If I went back to my people, certainly they would kill me, whomthey thought a thief. My blood would be given for Noma's, and that Idid not wish, though my heart was sad. Then there came into my mindthe thought of Chaka, the boy to whom I had given the cup of waterlong ago. I had heard of him: his name was known in the land; alreadythe air was big with it; the very trees and grass spoke it. The wordshe had said and the vision that my mother had seen were beginning tocome true. By the help of the Umtetwas he had taken the place of hisfather Senzangacona; he had driven out the tribe of the Amaquabe; nowhe made war on Zweete, chief of the Endwande, and he had sworn that hewould stamp the Endwande flat, so that nobody could find them anymore. Now I remembered how this Chaka promised that he would make megreat, and that I should grow fat in his shadow; and I thought tomyself that I would arise and go to him. Perhaps he would kill me;well, what did it matter? Certainly I should be killed if I stayedehre. Yes, I would go. But now my heart pulled another way. There wasbut one whom I loved in the world--it was my sister Baleka. My fatherhad betrothed her to the chief of a neighbouring tribe, but I knewthat this marriage was against her wish. Perhaps my sister would runaway with me if I could get near her to tell her that I was going. Iwould try--yes, I would try.

　　I waited till the darkness came down, then I rose from my bed of weedsand crept like a jackal towards the kraal. In the mealie gardens I

　　stopped awhile, for I was very hungry, and filled myself with thehalf-ripe mealies. Then I went on till I came to the kraal. Some of mypeople were seated outside of a hut, talking together over a fire. Icrept near, silently as a snake, and hid behind a little bush. I knewthat they could not see me outside the ring of the firelight, and Iwanted to hear what they said. As I guessed, they were talking of meand called me many names. They said that I should bring ill-luck onthe tribe by having killed so great a witch-doctor as Noma; also thatthe people of the headman would demand payment for the assault on him.I learned, moreover, that my father had ordered out all the men of thetribe to hunt for me on the morrow and to kill me wherever they foundme. "Ah!" I thought, "you may hunt, but you will bring nothing home tothe pot." Just then a dog that was lying by the fire got up and beganto sniff the air. I could not see what dog it was--indeed, I hadforgotten all about the dogs when I drew near the kraal; that is whatcomes of want of experience, my father. The dog sniffed and sniffed,then he began to growl, looking always my way, and I grew afraid.

　　"What is the dog growling at?" said one man to another. "Go and see."But the other man was taking snuff and did not like to move. "Let thedog go and see for himself," he answered, sneezing, "what is the goodof keeping a dog if you have to catch the thief?"

　　"Go on, then," said the first man to the dog. And he ran forward,barking. Then I saw him: it was my own dog, Koos, a very good dog.Presently, as I lay not knowing what to do, he smelt my smell, stoppedbarking, and running round the bush he found me and began to lick myface. "Be quiet, Koos!" I whispered to him. And he lay down by myside.

　　"Where has that dog gone now?" said the first man. "Is he bewitched,that he stops barking suddenly and does not come back?"

　　"We will see," said the other, rising, a spear in his hand.

　　Now once more I was terribly afraid, for I thought that they wouldcatch me, or I must run for my life again. But as I sprang up to run,a big black snake glided between the men and went off towards thehuts. They jumped aside in a great fright, then all of them turned tofollow the snake, saying that this was what the dog was barking at.That was my good Ehlose, my father, which without any doubt took theshape of a snake to save my life.

　　When they had gone I crept off the other way, and Koos followed me. Atfirst I thought that I would kill him, lest he should betray me; butwhen I called to him to knock him on the head with my kerrie, he satdown upon the ground wagging his tail, and seemed to smile in my face,and I could not do it. So I thought that I would take my chance, andwe went on together. This was my purpose: first to creep into my ownhut and get my assegais and a skin blanket, then to gain speech withBaleka. My hut, I thought, would be empty, for nobody sleeps thereexcept myself, and the huts of Noma were some paces away to the right.I came to the reed fence that surrounded the huts. Nobody was to beseen at the gate, which was not shut with thorns as usual. It was myduty to close it, and I had not been there to do so. Then, bidding thedog lie down outside, I stepped through boldly, reached the door of myhut, and listened. It was empty; there was not even a breath to beheard. So I crept in and began to search for my assegais, my water-gourd, and my wood pillow, which was so nicely carved that I did notlike to leave it. Soon I found them. Then I felt about for my skinrug, and as I did so my hand touched something cold. I started, andfelt again. It was a man's face--the face of a dead man, of Noma, whomI had killed and who had been laid in my hut to await burial. Oh! thenI was frightened, for Noma dead and in the dark was worse than Nomaalive. I made ready to fly, when suddenly I heard the voices of womentalking outside the door of the hut. I knew the voices; they werethose of Noma's two wives, and one of them said she was coming in towatch by her husband's body. Now I was in a trap indeed, for before Icould do anything I saw the light go out of a hole in the hut, andknew by the sound of a fat woman puffing as she bent herself up thatNoma's first wife was coming through it. Presently she was in, and,squatting by the side of the corpse in such a fashion that I could notget to the door, she began to make lamentations and to cal down curseson me. Ah! she did not know that I was listening. I too squatted byNoma's head, and grew quick-witted in my fear. Now that the woman wasthere I was not so much afraid of the dead man, and I remembered, too,that he had been a great cheat; so I thought I would make him cheatfor the last time. I placed my hands beneath his shoulders and pushedhim up so that he sat upon the ground. The woman heard the noise andmade a sound in her throat.

　　"Will you not be quiet, you old hag?" I said in Noma's voice. "Can younot let me be at peace, even now when I am dead?"

　　She heard, and, falling backwards in fear, drew in her breath toshriek aloud.

　　"What! will you also dare to shriek?" I said again in Noma's voice;"then I must teach you silence." And I tumbled him over on to the topof her.

　　Then her senses left her, and whether she ever found them again I donot know. At least she grew quiet for that time. For me, I snatched upthe rug--afterwards I found it was Noma's best kaross, made by Basutosof chosen cat-skins, and worth three oxen--and I fled, followed byKoos.

　　Now the kraal of the chief, my father, Makedama, was two hundred pacesaway, and I must go thither, for there Baleka slept. Also I dared notenter by the gate, because a man was always on guard there. So I cutmy way through the reed fence with my assegai and crept to the hutwhere Baleka was with some of her half-sisters. I knew on which sideof the hut it was her custom to lie, and where her head would be. So Ilay down on my side and gently, very gently, began to bore a hole inthe grass covering of the hut. It took a long while, for the thatchwas thick, but at last I was nearly through it. Then I stopped, for itcame into my mind that Baleka might have changed her place, and that Imight wake the wrong girl. I almost gave it over, thinking that Iwould fly alone, when suddenly I heard a girl wake and begin to cry onthe other side of the thatch. "Ah," I thought, "that is Baleka, whoweeps for her brother!" So I put my lips where the thatch was thinnestand whispered:--

　　"Baleka, my sister! Baleka, do not weep! I, Mopo, am here. Say not aword, but rise. Come out of the hut, bringing your skin blanket.

　　Now Baleka was very clever: she did not shriek, as most girls wouldhave done. No; she understood, and, after waiting awhile, she rose andcrept from the hut, her blanket in her hand.

　　"Why are you here, Mopo?" she whispered, as we met. "Surely you willbe killed!"

　　"Hush!" I said. And then I told her of the plan which I had made."Will you come with me?" I said, when I had done, "or will you creepback into the hut and bid me farewell?"

　　She thought awhile, then she said, "No, my brother, I will come, for Ilove you alone among our people, though I believe that this will bethe end of it--that you will lead me to my death."

　　I did not think much of her words at the time, but afterwards theycame back to me. So we slipped away together, followed by the dogKoos, and soon we were running over the veldt with our faces settowards the country of the Zulu tribe.

　　CHAPTER IV

　　THE FLIGHT OF MOPO AND BALEKA

　　All the rest of that night we journeyed, till even the dog was tired.Then we hid in a mealie field for the day, as we were afraid of beingseen. Towards the afternoon we heard voices, and, looking through thestems of the mealies, we saw a party of my father's men pass searchingfor us. They went on to a neighbouring kraal to ask if we had beenseen, and after that we saw them no more for awhile. At night wetravelled again; but, as fate would have it, we were met by an oldwoman, who looked oddly at us but said nothing. After that we pushedon day and night, for we knew that the old woman would tell thepursuers if she met them; and so indeed it came about. On the thirdevening we reached some mealie gardens, and saw that they had beentrampled down. Among the broken mealies we found the body of a veryold man, as full of assegai wounds as a porcupine with quills. Wewondered at this, and went on a little way. Then we saw that the kraalto which the gardens belonged was burnt down. We crept up to it, and--ah! it was a sad sight for us to see! Afterwards we became used tosuch sights. All about us lay the bodies of dead people, scores ofthem--old men, young men, women, children, little babies at the breast--there they lay among the burnt huts, pierced with assegai wounds.Red was the earth with their blood, and red they looked in the redlight of the setting sun. It was as though all the land had beensmeared with the bloody hand of the Great Spirit, of the Umkulunkulu.Baleka saw it and began to cry; she was weary, poor girl, and we hadfound little to eat, only grass and green corn.

　　"An enemy has been here," I said, and as I spoke I thought that Iheard a groan from the other side of a broken reed hedge. I went andlooked. There lay a young woman: she was badly wounded, but stillalive, my father. A little way from her lay a man dead, and before himseveral other men of another tribe: he had died fighting. In front ofthe woman were the bodies of three children; another, a little one,lay on her body. I looked at the woman, and, as I looked, she groanedagain, opened her eyes and saw me, and that I had a spear in my hand.

　　"Kill me quickly!" she said. "Have you not tortured me enough?"

　　I said that I was a stranger and did not want to kill her.

　　"Then bring me water," she said; "there is a spring there behind thekraal."

　　I called to Baleka to come to the woman, and went with my gourd to thespring. There were bodies in it, but I dragged them out, and when thewater had cleared a little I filled the gourd and brought it back tothe woman. She drank deep, and her strength came back a little--thewater gave her life.

　　"How did you come to this?" I asked.

　　"It was an impi of Chaka, Chief of the Zulus, that ate us up," sheanswered. "They burst upon as at dawn this morning while we wereasleep in our huts. Yes, I woke up to hear the sound of killing. I wassleeping by my husband, with him who lies there, and the children. Weall ran out. My husband had a spear and shield. He was a brave man.See! he died bravely: he killed three of the Zulu devils before hehimself was dead. Then they caught me, and killed my children, andstabbed me till they thought that I was dead. Afterwards, they wentaway. I don't know why they came, but I think it was because our chiefwould not send men to help Chaka against Zweete."

　　She stopped, gave a great cry, and died.

　　My sister wept at the sight, and I too was stirred by it. "Ah!" Ithought to myself, "the Great Spirit must be evil. If he is not evilsuch things would not happen." That is how I thought then, my father;now I think differently. I know that we had not found out the path ofthe Great Spirit, that is all. I was a chicken in those days, myfather; afterwards I got used to such sights. They did not stir me anymore, not one whit. But then in the days of Chaka the rivers ran blood--yes, we had to look at the water to see if it was clean before wedrank. People learned how to die then and not make a noise about it.What does it matter? They would have been dead now anyway. It does notmatter; nothing matters, except being born. That is a mistake, myfather.

　　We stopped at the kraal that night, but we could not sleep, for weheard the Itongo, the ghosts of the dead people, moving about andcalling to each other. It was natural that they should do so; men werelooking for their wives, and mothers for their children. But we wereafraid that they might be angry with us for being there, so we clungtogether and trembled in each other's arms. Koos also trembled, andfrom time to time he howled loudly. But they did not seem to see us,and towards morning their cries grew fainter.

　　When the first light came we rose and picked our way through the deaddown to the plain. Now we had an easy road to follow to Chaka's kraal,for there was the spoor of the impi and of the cattle which they hadstolen, and sometimes we came to the body of a warrior who had beenkilled because his wounds prevented him from marching farther. But nowI was doubtful whether it was wise for us to go to Chaka, for afterwhat we had seen I grew afraid lest he should kill us. Still, we hadnowhere to turn, so I said that we would walk along till somethinghappened. Now we grew faint with hunger and weariness, and Baleka saidthat we had better sit down and die, for then there would be no moretrouble. So we sat down by a spring. But I did not wish to die yet,thought Baleka was right, and it would have been well to do so. As wesat, the dog Koos went to a bush that was near, and presently I heardhim spring at something and the sound of struggling. I ran to the bush--he had caught hold of a duiker buck, as big as himself, that wasasleep in it. Then I drove my spear into the buck and shouted for joy,for here was food. When the buck was dead I skinned him, and we tookbits of the flesh, washed them in the water, and ate them, for we hadno fire to cook them with. It is not nice to eat uncooked flesh, butwe were so hungry that we did not mind, and the good refreshed us.When we had eaten what we could, we rose and washed ourselves at thespring; but, as we washed, Baleka looked up and gave a cry of fear.For there, on the crest of the hill, about ten spear-throws away, wasa party of six armed men, people of my own tribe--children of myfather Makedama--who still pursued us to take us or kill us. They sawus--they raised a shout, and began to run. We too sprang up and ran--ran like bucks, for fear had touched our feet.

　　Now the land lay thus. Before us the ground was open and sloped downto the banks of the White Umfolozi, which twisted through the plainlike a great and shining snake. On the other side the ground roseagain, and we did not know what was beyond, but we thought that inthis direction lay the kraal of Chaka. We ran for the river--whereelse were we to run? And after us came the warriors. They gained onus; they were strong, and they were angry because they had come sofar. Run as we would, still they gained. Now we neared the banks ofthe river; it was full and wide. Above us the waters ran angrily,breaking into swirls of white where they passed over sunken rocks;below was a rapid, in which none might live; between the two a deeppool, where the water was quiet but the stream strong.

　　"Ah! my brother, what shall we do?" gasped Baleka.

　　"There is this to choose," I answered; "perish on the spears of ourpeople or try the river."

　　"Easier to die by water than on iron," she answered.

　　"Good!" I said. "Now may our snakes look towards us and the spirits ofour fathers be with us! At the least we can swim." And I led her tothe head of the pool. We threw away our blankets--everything except anassegai, which I held in my teeth--and we plunged in, wading as far aswe could. Now we were up to our breasts; now we had lost the earth andwere swimming towards the middle of the river, the dog Koos leadingthe way.

　　Then it was that the soldiers appeared upon the bank. "Ah! littlepeople," one cried, "you swim, do you? Well, you will drown; and ifyou do not drown we know a ford, and we will catch you and kill you--yes! if we must run over the edge of the world after you we will catchyou." And he hurled an assegai after us, which fell between us like aflash of light.

　　While he spoke we swam hard, and now we were in the current. It sweptus downwards, but still we made way, for we could swim well. It wasjust this: if we could reach the bank before we were swept into therapids we were safe; if not, then--good-night! Now we were near theother side, but, alas! we were also near the lip of the foaming water.We strained, we struggled. Baleka was a brave girl, and she swambravely; but the water pushed her down below me, and I could donothing to help her. I got my foot upon the rock and looked round.There she was, and eight paces from her the broken water boiled. Icould not go back. I was too weak, and it seemed that she must perish.But the dog Koos saw. He swam towards her, barking, then turned round,heading for the shore. She grasped him by the tail with her righthand. Then he put out his strength--he was very strong. She tookstruck out with her feet and left hand, and slowly--very slowly--drewnear. Then I stretched out the handle of my assegai towards her. Shecaught it with her left hand. Already her feet were over the brink ofthe rapids, but I pulled and Koos pulled, and we brought her safe intothe shadows, and from the shallows to the bank, and there she fellgasping.

　　Now when the soldiers on the other bank saw that we had crossed, theyshouted threats at us, then ran away down the bank.

　　"Arise, Baleka!" I said: "they have gone to see a ford."

　　"Ah, let me die!" she answered.

　　But I forced her to rise, and after awhile she got her breath again,and we walked on as fast as we could up the long rise. For two hourswe walked, or more, till at last we came to the crest of the rise, andthere, far away, we saw a large kraal.

　　"Keep heart," I said. "See, there is the kraal of Chaka."

　　"Yes, brother," she answered, "but what waits us there? Death isbehind us and before us--we are in the middle of death."

　　Presently we came to a path that ran to the kraal from the ford of theUmfolozi. It was by it that the Impi had travelled. We followed thepath till at last we were but half an hour's journey from the kraal.Then we looked back, and lo! there behind us were the pursuers--fiveof them--one had drowned in crossing the river.

　　Again we ran, but now we were weak, and they gained upon us. Then oncemore I thought of the dog. He was fierce and would tear any one onwhom I set him. I called him and told him what to do, though I knewthat it would be his death. He understood, and flew towards thesoldiers growling, his hair standing up on his spine. They tried tokill him with spears and kerries, but he jumped round them, biting atthem, and kept them back. At last a man hit him, and he sprang up andseized the man by the throat. There he clung, man and dog rolling overand over together, till the end of it was that they both died. Ah! hewas a dog! We do not see such dogs nowadays. His father was a Boerhound, the first that came into the country. That dog once killed aleopard all by himself. Well, this was the end of Koos!

　　Meanwhile, we had been running. Now we were but three hundred pacesfrom the gate of the kraal, and there was something going on insideit; that we could see from the noise and the dust. The four soldiers,leaving the dead dog and the dying man, came after us swiftly. I sawthat they must catch us before we reached the gate, for now Balekacould go but slowly. Then a thought came into my head. I had broughther here, I would save her life if I could. Should she reach the kraalwithout me, Chaka would not kill a girl who was so young and fair.

　　"Run on, Baleka! run on!" I said, dropping behind. Now she was almostblind with weariness and terror, and, not seeing my purpose, staggeredtowards the gate of the kraal. But I sat down on the veldt to get mybreath again, for I was about to fight four men till I was killed. Myheart beat and the blood drummed in my ears, but when they drew nearand I rose--the assegai in my hand--once more the red cloth seemed togo up and down before my eyes, and all fear left me.

　　The men were running, two and two, with the length of a spear throwbetween them. But of the first pair one was five or six paces in frontof the other. This man shouted out loud and charged me, shield andspear up. Now I had no shield--nothing but the assegai; but I wascrafty and he was overbold. On he came. I stood waiting for him tillhe drew back the spear to stab me. Then suddenly I dropped to my kneesand thrust upward with all my strength, beneath the rim of his shield,and he also thrust, but over me, his spear only cutting the flesh ofmy shoulder--see! here is its scar; yes, to this day. And my assegai?Ah! it went home; it ran through and through his middle. He rolledover and over on the plain. The dust hid him; only I was nowweaponless, for the haft of my spear--it was but a light throwingassegai--broke in two, leaving nothing but a little bit of stick in myhand. And the other one was upon me. Then in the darkness I saw alight. I fell on to my hands and knees and flung myself over sideways.My body struck the legs of the man who was about to stab me, liftinghis feet from beneath him. Down he came heavily. Before he had touchedthe ground I was off it. His spear had fallen from his hand. Istooped, seized it, and as he rose I stabbed him through the back. Itwas all done in the shake of a leaf, my father; in the shake of a leafhe also was dead. Then I ran, for I had no stomach for the other two;my valour was gone.

　　About a hundred paces from me Baleka was staggering along with herarms out like one who has drunk too much beer. By the time I caughther she was some forty paces from the gate of the kraal. But then herstrength left her altogether. Yes! there she fell senseless, and Istood by her. And there, too, I should have been killed, had not thischanced, since the other two men, having stayed one instant by theirdead fellows, came on against me mad with rage. For at that moment thegate of the kraal opened, and through it ran a party of soldiersdragging a prisoner by the arms. After them walked a great man, whowore a leopard skin on his shoulders, and was laughing, and with himwere five or six ringed councillors, and after them again came acompany of warriors.

　　The soldiers saw that killing was going on, and ran up just as theslayers reached us.

　　"Who are you?" they cried, "who day to kill at the gate of theElephant's kraal? Here the Elephant kills alone."

　　"We are of the children of Makedama," they answered, "and we followthese evildoers who have done wickedness and murder in our kraal. See!but now two of us are dead at their hands, and others lie dead alongthe road. Suffer that we slay them."

　　"Ask that of the Elephant," said the soldiers; "ask too that he sufferyou should not be slain."

　　Just then the tall chief saw blood and heard words. He stalked up; andhe was a great man to look at, though still quite young in years. Forhe was taller by a head than any round him, and his chest was big asthe chests of two; his face was fierce and beautiful, and when he grewangry his eye flashed like a smitten brand.

　　"Who are these that dare to stir up dust at the gates of my kraal?" heasked, frowning.

　　"O Chaka, O Elephant!" answered the captain of the soldiers, bendinghimself double before him, "the men say that these are evildoers andthat they pursue them to kill them."

　　"Good!" he answered. "Let them slay the evildoers."

　　"O great chief! thanks be to thee, great chief!" said those men of mypeople who sought to kill us.

　　"I hear you," he answered, then spoke once more to the captain. "Andwhen they have slain the evildoers, let themselves be blinded andturned loose to seek their way home, because they have dared to lift aspear within the Zulu gates. Now praise on, my children!" And helaughed, while the soldiers murmured, "Ou! he is wise, he is great,his justice is bright and terrible like the sun!"

　　But the two men of my people cried out in fear, for they did not seeksuch justice as this.

　　"Cut out their tongues also," said Chaka. "What? shall the land of theZulus suffer such a noise? Never! lest the cattle miscarry. To it, yeblack ones! There lies the girl. She is asleep and helpless. Kill her!What? you hesitate? Nay, then, if you will have time for thought, Igive it. Take these men, smear them with honey, and pin them over ant-heaps; by to-morrow's sun they will know their own minds. But firstkill these two hunted jackals," and he pointed to Baleka and myself."They seem tired and doubtless they long for sleep."

　　Then for the first time I spoke, for the soldiers drew near to slayus.

　　"O Chaka," I cried, "I am Mopo, and this is my sister Baleka."

　　I stopped, and a great shout of laughter went up from all who stoodround.

　　"Very well, Mopo and thy sister Baleka," said Chaka, grimly. "Good-morning to you, Mopo and Baleka--also, good-night!"

　　"O Chaka," I broke in, "I am Mopo, son of Makedama of the Langenitribe. It was I who gave thee a gourd of water many years ago, when wewere both little. Then thou badest me come to thee when thou hadstgrown great, vowing that thou wouldst protect me and never do me harm.So I have come, bringing my sister with me; and now, I pray thee, donot eat up the words of long ago."

　　As I spoke, Chaka's face changed, and he listened earnestly, as a manwho holds his hand behind his ear. "Those are no liars," he said."Welcome, Mopo! Thou shalt be a dog in my hut, and feed from my hand.But of thy sister I said nothing. Why, then, should she not be slainwhen I swore vengeance against all thy tribe, save thee alone?"

　　"Because she is too fair to slay, O Chief!" I answered, boldly; "alsobecause I love her, and ask her life as a boon!"

　　"Turn the girl over," said Chaka. And they did so, showing her face.

　　"Again thou speakest no lie, son of Makedama," said the chief. "Igrant thee the boon. She also shall lie in my hut, and be of thenumber of my 'sisters.' Now tell me thy tale, speaking only thetruth."

　　So I sat down and told him all. Nor did he grow weary of listening.But, when I had done, he said but one thing--that he would that thedog Koos had not been killed; since, if he had still been alive, hewould have set him on the hut of my father Makedama, and made himchief over the Langeni.

　　Then he spoke to the captain of the soldiers. "I take back my words,"he said. "Let not these men of the Langeni be mutilated. One shall dieand the other shall go free. Here," and he pointed to the man whom wehad seen led out of the kraal-gate, "here, Mopo, we have a man who hasproved himself a coward. Yesterday a kraal of wizards yonder was eatenup by my order--perhaps you two saw it as you travelled. This man andthree others attacked a soldier of that kraal who defended his wifeand children. The man fought well--he slew three of my people. Thenthis dog was afraid to meet him face to face. He killed him with athrowing assegai, and afterwards he stabbed the woman. That isnothing; but he should have fought the husband hand to hand. Now Iwill do him honour. He shall fight to the death with one of these pigsfrom thy sty," and he pointed with his spear to the men of my father'skraal, "and the one who survives shall be run down as they tried torun you down. I will send back the other pig to the sty with amessage. Choose, children of Makedama, which of you will live."

　　Now the two men of my tribe were brothers, and loved one another, andeach of them was willing to die that the other might go free.Therefore, both of them stepped forward, saying that they would fightthe Zulu.

　　"What, is there honour among pigs?" said Chaka. "Then I will settleit. See this assegai? I throw it into the air; if the blade fallsuppermost the tall man shall go free; if the shaft falls uppermost,then life is to the short one, so!" And he sent the little spearwhirling round and round in the air. Every eye watched it as itwheeled and fell. The haft struck the ground first.

　　"Come hither, thou," said Chaka to the tall brother. "Hasten back tothe kraal of Makedama, and say to him, Thus says Chaka, the Lion ofthe Zulu-ka-Malandela, 'Years ago thy tribe refused me milk. To-daythe dog of thy son Mopo howls upon the roof of thy hut.' Begone!"[1]

　　[1] Among the Zulus it is a very bad omen for a dog to climb the roofof a hut. The saying conveyed a threat to be appreciated by everyZulu.--ED.

　　The man turned, shook his brother by the hand, and went, bearing thewords of evil omen.

　　Then Chaka called to the Zulu and the last of those who had followedus to kill us, bidding them fight. So, when they had praised theprince they fought fiercely, and the end of it was that the man of mypeople conquered the Zulu. But as soon as he had found his breathagain he was set to run for his life, and after him ran five chosenmen.

　　Still, it came about that he outran them, doubling like a hare, andgot away safely. Nor was Chaka angry at this; for I think that he badethe men who hunted him to make speed slowly. There was only one goodthing in the cruel heart of Chaka, that he would always save the lifeof a brave man if he could do so without making his word nothing. Andfor my part, I was glad to think that the man of my people hadconquered him who murdered the children of the dying woman that wefound at the kraal beyond the river.

　　CHAPTER V

　　MOPO BECOMES THE KING'S DOCTOR

　　These, then, my father, were the events that ended in the coming ofme, Mopo, and of my sister Baleka to the kraal of Chaka, the Lion ofthe Zulu. Now you may ask why have I kept you so long with this tale,which is as are other tales of our people. But that shall be seen, forfrom these matters, as a tree from a seed, grew the birth ofUmslopogaas Bulalio, Umslopogaas the Slaughterer, and Nada theBeautiful, of whose love my story has to tell. For Nada was mydaughter, and Umslopogaas, though few knew it, was none other than theson of Chaka, born of my sister Baleka.

　　Now when Baleka recovered from the weariness of our flight, and hadher beauty again, Chaka took her to wife, numbering her among hiswomen, whom he named his "sisters." And me Chaka took to be one of hisdoctors, of his izinyanga of medicine, and he was so well pleased withmy medicine that in the end I became his head doctor. Now this was agreat post, in which, during the course of years, I grew fat in cattleand in wives; but also it was one of much danger. For when I rosestrong and well in the morning, I could never know but that at night Ishould sleep stiff and red. Many were the doctors whom Chaka slew;doctored they never so well, they were killed at last. For a day wouldsurely come when the king felt ill in his body or heavy in his mind,and then to the assegai or the torment with the wizard who haddoctored him! Yet I escaped, because of the power of my medicine, andalso because of that oath which Chaka had sworn to me as a child. Soit came about that where the king went there I went with him. I sleptnear his hut, I sat behind him at council, in the battle I was ever athis side.

　　Ah! the battle! the battle! In those days we knew how to fight, myfather! In those days the vultures would follow our impis bythousands, the hyenas would steal along our path in packs, and nonewent empty away. Never may I forget the first fight I stood in at theside of Chaka. It was just after the king had built his great kraal onthe south bank of the Umhlatuze. Then it was that the chief Zwideattacked his rival Chaka for the third time and Chaka moved out tomeet him with ten full regiments,[1] now for the first time armed withthe short stabbing-spear.

　　[1] About 30,000 men.--ED.

　　The ground lay this: On a long, low hill in front of our impi weremassed the regiments of Zwide; there were seventeen of them; the earthwas black with their number; their plumes filled the air like snow.We, too, were on a hill, and between us lay a valley down which thereran a little stream. All night our fires shone out across the valley;all night the songs of soldiers echoed down the hills. Then the greydawning came, the oxen lowed to the light, the regiments arose fromtheir bed of spears; they sprang up and shook the dew from hair andshield--yes! they arose! the glad to die! The impi assumed its arrayregiment by regiment. There was the breast of spears, there were thehorns of spears, they were numberless as the stars, and like the starsthey shone. The morning breeze came up and fanned them, their plumesbent in the breeze; like a plain of seeding grass they bent, theplumes of the soldiers ripe for the assegai. Up over the shoulder ofthe hill came the sun of Slaughter; it glowed red upon the redshields, red grew the place of killing; the white plumes of the chiefswere dipped in the blood of heaven. They knew it; they saw the omen ofdeath, and, ah! they laughed in the joy of the waking of battle. Whatwas death? Was it not well to die on the spear? What was death? Was itnot well to die for the king? Death was the arms of Victory. Victorywould be their bride that night, and oh! her breast is fair.

　　Hark! the war-song, the Ingomo, the music of which has the power todrive men mad, rose far away to the left, and was thrown along fromregiment to regiment--a rolling ball of sound--

　　We are the king's kine, bred to be butchered,You, too, are one of us!We are the Zulu, children of the Lion,What! did you tremble?

　　Suddenly Chaka was seen stalking through the ranks, followed by hiscaptains, his indunas, and by me. He walked along like a great buck;death was in his eyes, and like a buck he sniffed the air, scentingthe air of slaughter. He lifted his assegai, and a silence fell; onlythe sound of chanting still rolled along the hills.

　　"Where are the children of Zwide?" he shouted, and his voice was likethe voice of a bull.

　　"Yonder, father," answered the regiments. And every spear pointedacross the valley.

　　"They do not come," he shouted again. "Shall we then sit here till wegrow old?"

　　"No, father," they answered. "Begin! begin!"

　　"Let the Umkandhlu regiment come forward!" he shouted a third time,and as he spoke the black shields of the Umkandhlu leaped from theranks of the impi.

　　"Go, my children!" cried Chaka. "There is the foe. Go and return nomore!"

　　"We hear you, father!" they answered with one voice, and moved downthe slope like a countless herd of game with horns of steel.

　　Now they crossed the stream, and now Zwide awoke. A murmur wentthrough his companies; lines of light played above his spears.

　　Ou! they are coming! Ou! they have met! Hearken to the thunder of theshields! Hearken to the song of battle!

　　To and fro they swing. The Umkandhlu gives way--it flies! They pourback across the stream--half of them; the rest are dead. A howl ofrage goes up from the host, only Chaka smiles.

　　"Open up! open up!" he cries. "Make room for the Umkandhlu GIRLS!" Andwith hanging heads they pass us.

　　Now he whispers a word to the indunas. The indunas run; they whisperto Menziwa the general and to the captains; then two regiments rushdown the hill, two more run to the right, and yet another two to theleft. But Chaka stays on the hill with the three that are left. Againcomes the roar of the meeting shields. Ah! these are men: they fight,they do not run. Regiment after regiment pours upon them, but stillthey stand. They fall by hundreds and by thousands, but no man showshis back, and on each man there lie two dead. Wow! my father, of thosetwo regiments not one escaped. They were but boys, but they were thechildren of Chaka. Menziwa was buried beneath the heaps of hiswarriors. Now there are no such men.

　　They are all dead and quiet. Chaka still holds his hand! He looks tothe north and to the south. See! spears are shining among the trees.Now the horns of our host close upon the flanks of the foe. They slayand are slain, but the men of Zwide are many and brave, and the battleturns against us.

　　Then again Chaka speaks a word. The captains hear, the soldiersstretch out their necks to listen.

　　It has come at last. "Charge! Children of the Zulu!"

　　There is a roar, a thunder of feet, a flashing of spears, a bending ofplumes, and, like a river that has burnt its banks, like storm-cloudsbefore the gale, we sweep down upon friend and foe. They form up tomeet us; the stream is passed; our wounded rise upon their haunchesand wave us on. We trample them down. What matter? They can fight nomore. Then we meet Zwide rushing to greet us, as bull meets bull. Ou!my father, I know no more. Everything grows red. That fight! thatfight! We swept them away. When it was done there was nothing to beseen, but the hillside was black and red. Few fled; few were left tofly. We passed over them like fire; we ate them up. Presently wepaused, looking for the foe. All were dead. The host of Zwide was nomore. Then we mustered. Ten regiments had looked upon the morning sun;three regiments saw the sun sink; the rest had gone where no sunsshine.

　　Such were our battles in the days of Chaka!

　　You ask of the Umkandhlu regiment which fled. I will tell you. When wereached our kraal once more, Chaka summoned that regiment and musteredit. He spoke to them gently, gently. He thanked them for theirservice. He said it was natural that "girls" should faint at the sightof blood and turn to seek their kraals. Yet he had bid them come backno more and they had come back! What then was there now left for himto do? And he covered his face with his blanket. Then the soldierskilled them all, nearly two thousand of them--killed them with tauntsand jeers.

　　That is how we dealt with cowards in those days, my father. Afterthat, one Zulu was a match for five of any other tribe. If ten cameagainst him, still he did not turn his back. "Fight and fall, but flynot," that was our watchword. Never again while Chaka lived did aconquered force pass the gates of the king's kraal.

　　That fight was but one war out of many. With every moon a fresh impistarted to wash its spears, and came back few and thin, but withvictory and countless cattle. Tribe after tribe went down before us.Those of them who escaped the assegai were enrolled into freshregiments, and thus, though men died by thousands every month, yet thearmy grew. Soon there were no other chiefs left. Umsuduka fell, andafter him Mancengeza. Umzilikazi was driven north; Matiwane wasstamped flat. Then we poured into this land of Natal. When we entered,its people could not be numbered. When we left, here and there a manmight be found in a hole in the earth--that was all. Men, women, andchildren, we wiped them out; the land was clean of them. Next came theturn of U'Faku, chief of the Amapondos. Ah! where is U'faku now?

　　And so it went on and on, till even the Zulus were weary of war andthe sharpest assegais grew blunt.

　　CHAPTER VI

　　THE BIRTH OF UMSLOPOGAAS

　　This was the rule of the life of Chaka, that he would have nochildren, though he had many wives. Every child born to him by his"sisters" was put away at once.

　　"What, Mopo," he said to me, "shall I rear up children to put me tothe assegai when they grow great? They call me tyrant. Say, how dothose chiefs die whom men name tyrants? They die at the hands of thosewhom they have bred. Nay, Mopo, I will rule for my life, and when Ijoin the spirits of my fathers let the strongest take my power and myplace!"

　　Now it chanced that shortly after Chaka had spoken thus, my sisterBaleka, the king's wife, fell in labour; and on that same day my wifeMacropha was brought to bed of twins, and this but eight days after mysecond wife, Anadi, had given birth to a son. You ask, my father, howI came to be married, seeing that Chaka forbade marriage to all hissoldiers till they were in middle life and had put the man's ring upontheir heads. It was a boon he granted me as inyanga of medicine,saying it was well that a doctor should know the sicknesses of womenand learn how to cure their evil tempers. As though, my father, thatwere possible!

　　When the king heard that Baleka was sick he did not kill her outright,because he loved her a little, but he sent for me, commanding me toattend her, and when the child was born to cause its body to bebrought to him, according to custom, so that he might be sure that itwas dead. I bent to the earth before him, and went to do his biddingwith a heavy heart, for was not Baleka my sister? and would not herchild be of my own blood? Still, it must be so, for Chaka's whisperwas as the shout of other kings, and, if we dared to disobey, then ourlives and the lives of all in our kraals would answer for it. Betterthat an infant should die than that we should become food for jackals.Presently I came to the Emposeni, the place of the king's wives, anddeclared the king's word to the soldiers on guard. They lowered theirassegais and let me pass, and I entered the hut of Baleka. In it wereothers of the king's wives, but when they saw me they rose and wentaway, for it was not lawful that they should stay where I was. Thus Iwas left alone with my sister.

　　For awhile she lay silent, and I did not speak, though I saw by theheaving of her breast that she was weeping.

　　"Hush, little one!" I said at length; "your sorrow will soon be done."

　　"Nay," she answered, lifting her head, "it will be but begun. Oh,cruel man! I know the reason of your coming. You come to murder thebabe that shall be born of me."

　　"It is the king's word, woman."

　　"It is the king's word, and what is the king's word? Have I, then,naught to say in this matter?"

　　"It is the king's child, woman."

　　"It is the king's child, and it is not also my child? Must my babe bedragged from my breast and be strangled, and by you, Mopo? Have I notloved you, Mopo? Did I not flee with you from our people and thevengeance of our father? Do you know that not two moons gone the kingwas wroth with you because he fell sick, and would have caused you tobe slain had I not pleaded for you and called his oath to mind? Andthus you pay me: you come to kill my child, my first-born child!"

　　"It is the king's word, woman," I answered sternly; but my heart wassplit in two within me.

　　Then Baleka said no more, but, turning her face to the wall of thehut, she wept and groaned bitterly.

　　Now, as she wept I heard a stir without the hut, and the light in thedoorway was darkened. A woman entered alone. I looked round to see whoit was, then fell upon the ground in salutation, for before me wasUnandi, mother of the king, who was named "Mother of the Heavens,"that same lady to whom my mother had refused the milk.

　　"Hail, Mother of the Heavens!" I said.

　　"Greeting, Mopo," she answered. "Say, why does Baleka weep? Is itbecause the sorrow of women is upon her?"

　　"Ask of her, great chieftainess," I said.

　　Then Baleka spoke: "I weep, mother of a king, because this man, who ismy brother, has come from him who is my lord and they son, to murderthat which shall be born of me. O thou whose breasts have given suck,plead for me! Thy son was not slain at birth."

　　"Perhaps it were well if he had been so slain, Baleka," said Unandi;"then had many another man lived to look upon the sun who is nowdead."

　　"At the least, as an infant he was good and gentle, and thou mightestlove him, Mother of the Zulu."

　　"Never, Baleka! As a babe he bit my breast and tore my hair; as theman is so was the babe."

　　"Yet may his child be otherwise, Mother of the Heavens! Think, thouhast no grandson to comfort thee in thy age. Wilt thou, then, see allthy stock wither? The king, our lord, lives in war. He too may die,and what then?"

　　"Then the root of Senzangacona is still green. Has the king nobrothers?"

　　"They are not of they flesh, mother. What? thou dost not hearken! Thenas a woman to woman I plead with thee. Save my child or slay me withmy child!"

　　Now the heart of Unandi grew gentle, and she was moved to tears.

　　"How may this be done, Mopo?" she said. "The king must see the deadinfant, and if he suspect, and even reeds have ears, you know theheart of Chaka and where we shall lie to-morrow."

　　"Are there then no other new-born babes in Zululand?" said Baleka,sitting up and speaking in a whisper like the hiss of a snake."Listen, Mopo! Is not your wife also in labour? Now hear me, Mother ofthe Heavens, and, my brother, hear me also. Do not think to play withme in this matter. I will save my child or you twain will perish withit. For I will tell the king that you came to me, the two of you, andwhispered plots into my ear--plots to save the child and kill theking. Now choose, and swiftly!"

　　She sank bank, there was silence, and we looked one upon another. ThenUnandi spoke.

　　"Give me your hand, Mopo, and swear that you will be faithful to me inthis secret, as I swear to you. A day may come when this child who hasnot seen the light rules as king in Zululand, and then in reward youshall be the greatest of the people, the king's voice, whisperer inthe king's ear. But if you break your oath, then beware, for I shallnot die alone!"

　　"I swear, Mother of the Heavens," I answered.

　　"It is well, son of Makedama."

　　"It is well, my brother," said Baleka. "Now go and do that which mustbe done swiftly, for my sorrow is upon me. Go, knowing that if youfail I will be pitiless, for I will bring you to your death, yes, evenif my own death is the price!"

　　So I went. "Whither to you go?" asked the guard at the gate.

　　"I go to bring my medicines, men of the king," I answered.

　　So I said; but, oh! my heart was heavy, and this was my plan--to flyfar from Zululand. I could not, and I dared not do this thing. What?should I kill my own child that its life might be given for the lifeof the babe of Baleka? And should I lift up my will against the willof the king, saving the child to look upon the sun which he had doomedto darkness? Nay, I would fly, leaving all, and seek out some fartribe where I might begin to live again. Here I could not live; herein the shadow of Chaka was nothing but death.

　　I reached my own huts, there to find that my wife Macropha wasdelivered of twins. I sent away all in the hut except my other wife,Anadi, she who eight days gone had born me a son. The second of thetwins was born; it was a boy, born dead. The first was a girl, she wholived to be Nada the Beautiful, Nada the Lily. Then a thought cameinto my heart. Here was a path to run on.

　　"Give me the boy," I said to Anadi. "He is not dead. Give him to methat I may take him outside the kraal and wake him to life by mymedicine."

　　"It is of no use--the child is dead," said Anadi.

　　"Give him to me, woman!" I said fiercely. And she gave me the body.

　　Then I took him and wrapped him up in my bundle of medicines, andoutside of all I rolled a mat of plaited grass.

　　"Suffer none to enter the hut till I return," I said; "and speak noword of the child that seems to be dead. If you allow any to enter, orif you speak a word, then my medicine will not work and the babe willbe dead indeed."

　　So I went, leaving the women wondering, for it is not our custom tosave both when twins are born; but I ran swiftly to the gates of theEmposeni.

　　"I bring the medicines, men of the king!" I said to the guards.

　　"Pass in," they answered.

　　I passed through the gates and into the hut of Baleka. Unandi wasalone in the hut with my sister.

　　"The child is born," said the mother of the king. "Look at him, Mopo,son of Makedama!"

　　I looked. He was a great child with large black eyes like the eyes ofChaka the king; and Unandi, too, looked at me. "Where is it?" shewhispered.

　　I loosed the mat and drew the dead child from the medicines, glancinground fearfully as I did so.

　　"Give me the living babe," I whispered back.

　　They gave it to me and I took of a drug that I knew and rubbed it onthe tongue of the child. Now this drug has the power to make thetongue it touches dumb for awhile. Then I wrapped up the child in mymedicines and again bound the mat about the bundle. But round thethroat of the still-born babe I tied a string of fibre as though I hadstrangled it, and wrapped it loosely in a piece of matting.

　　Now for the first time I spoke to Baleka: "Woman," I said, "and thoualso, Mother of the Heavens, I have done your wish, but know thatbefore all is finished this deed shall bring about the death of many.Be secret as the grave, for the grave yawns for you both."

　　I went again, bearing the mat containing the dead child in my righthand. But the bundle of medicines that held the living one I fastenedacross my shoulders. I passed out of the Emposeni, and, as I went, Iheld up the bundle in my right hand to the guards, showing them thatwhich was in it, but saying nothing.

　　"It is good," they said, nodding.

　　But now ill-fortune found me, for just outside the Emposeni I metthree of the king's messengers.

　　"Greeting, son of Makedama!" they said. "The king summons you to theIntunkulu"--that is the royal house, my father.

　　"Good!" I answered. "I will come now; but first I would run to my ownplace to see how it goes with Macropha, my wife. Here is that whichthe king seeks," and I showed them the dead child. "Take it to him ifyou will."

　　"That is not the king's command, Mopo," they answered. "His word isthat you should stand before him at once."

　　Now my heart turned to water in my breast. Kings have many ears. Couldhe have heard? And how dared I go before the Lion bearing his livingchild hidden on my back? Yet to waver was to be lost, to show fear wasto be lost, to disobey was to be lost.

　　"Good! I come," I answered. And we walked to the gate of theIntunkulu.

　　It was sundown. Chaka was sitting in the little courtyard in front ofhis hut. I went down on my knees before him and gave the royal salute,Bayete, and so I stayed.

　　"Rise, son of Makedama!" he said.

　　"I cannot rise, Lion of the Zulu," I answered, "I cannot rise, havingroyal blood on my hands, till the king has pardoned me."

　　"Where is it?" he asked.

　　I pointed to the mat in my hand.

　　"Let me look at it."

　　Then I undid the mat, and he looked on the child, and laughed aloud.

　　"He might have been a king," he said, as he bade a councillor take itaway. "Mopo, thou hast slain one who might have been a king. Art thounot afraid?"

　　"No, Black One," I answered, "the child is killed by order of one whois a king."

　　"Sit down, and let us talk," said Chaka, for his mood was idle. "To-morrow thou shalt have five oxen for this deed; thou shalt choose themfrom the royal herd."

　　"The king is good; he sees that my belt is drawn tight; he satisfiesmy hunger. Will the king suffer that I go? My wife is in labour and Iwould visit her."

　　"Nay, stay awhile; say how it is with Baleka, my sister and thine?"

　　"It is well."

　　"Did she weep when you took the babe from her?"

　　"Nay, she wept not. She said, 'My lord's will is my will.'"

　　"Good! Had she wept she had been slain also. Who was with her?"

　　"The Mother of the Heavens."

　　The brow of Chaka darkened. "Unandi, my mother, what did she there? Mymyself I swear, though she is my mother--if I thought"--and he ceased.

　　Thee was a silence, then he spoke again. "Say, what is in that mat?"and he pointed with his little assegai at the bundle on my shoulders.

　　"Medicine, king."

　　"Thou dost carry enough to doctor an impi. Undo the mat and let melook at it."

　　Now, my father, I tell you that the marrow melted in my bones withterror, for if I undid the mat I feared he must see the child andthen--"

　　"It is tagati, it is bewitched, O king. It is not wise to look onmedicine."

　　"Open!" he answered angrily. "What? may I not look at that which I amforced to swallow--I, who am the first of doctors?"

　　"Death is the king's medicine," I answered, lifting the bundle, andlaying it as far from him in the shadow of the fence as I dared. ThenI bent over it, slowly undoing the rimpis with which it was tied,while the sweat of terror ran down by face blinding me like tears.What would I do if he saw the child? What if the child awoke andcried? I would snatch the assegai from his hand and stab him! Yes, Iwould kill the king and then kill myself! Now the mat was unrolled.Inside were the brown leaves and roots of medicine; beneath them wasthe senseless bade wrapped in dead moss.

　　"Ugly stuff," said the king, taking snuff. "Now see, Mopo, what a goodaim I have! This for thy medicine!" And he lifted his assegai to throwit through the bundle. But as he threw, my snake put it into theking's heart to sneeze, and thus it came to pass that the assegai onlypierced the outer leaves of the medicine, and did not touch the child.

　　"May the heavens bless the king!" I said, according to custom.

　　"Thanks to thee, Mopo, it is a good omen," he answered. "And now,begone! Take my advice: kill thy children, as I kill mine, lest theylive to worry thee. The whelps of lions are best drowned."

　　I did up the bundle fast--fast, though my hands trembled. Oh! what ifthe child should wake and cry. It was done; I rose and saluted theking. Then I doubled myself up and passed from before him. Scarcelywas I outside the gates of the Intunkulu when the infant began tosqueak in the bundle. If it had been one minute before!

　　"What," said a soldier, as I passed, "have you got a puppy hiddenunder your moocha,[1] Mopo?"

　　[1] Girdle composed of skin and tails of oxen.-ED.

　　I made no answer, but hurried on till I came to my huts. I entered;there were my two wives alone.

　　"I have recovered the child, women," I said, as I undid the bundle.

　　Anadi took him and looked at him.

　　"The boy seems bigger than he was," she said.

　　"The breath of life has come into him and puffed him out," I answered.

　　"His eyes are not as his eyes were," she said again. "Now they are bigand black, like the eyes of the king."

　　"My spirit looked upon his eyes and made them beautiful," I answered.

　　"This child has a birth-mark on his thigh," she said a third time."That which I gave you had no mark."

　　"I laid my medicine there," I answered.

　　"It is not the same child," she said sullenly. "It is a changeling whowill lay ill-luck at our doors."

　　Then I rose up in my rage and cursed her heavily, for I saw that ifshe was not stopped this woman's tongue would bring us all to ruin.

　　"Peace, witch!" I cried. "How dare you to speak thus from a lyingheart? Do you wish to draw down a curse upon our roof? Would you makeus all food for the king's spear? Say such words again, and you shallsit within the circle--the Ingomboco shall know you for a witch!"

　　So I stormed on, threatening to bring her to death, till at length shegrew fearful, and fell at my feet praying for mercy and forgiveness.But I was much afraid because of this woman's tongue, and not withoutreason.

　　CHAPTER VII

　　UMSLOPOGAAS ANSWERS THE KING

　　Now the years went on, and this matter slept. Nothing more was heardof it, but still it only slept; and, my father, I feared greatly forthe hour when it should awake. For the secret was known by two women--Unandi, Mother of the Heavens, and Baleka, my sister, wife of theking; and by two more--Macropha and Anadi, my wives--it was guessedat. How, then, should it remain a secret forever? Moreover, it cameabout that Unandi and Baleka could not restrain their fondness forthis child who was called my son and named Umslopogaas, but who wasthe son of Chaka, the king, and of the Baleka, and the grandson ofUnandi. So it happened that very often one or the other of them wouldcome into my hut, making pretence to visit my wives, and take the boyupon her lap and fondle it. In vain did I pray them to forbear. Lovepulled at their heart-strings more heavily than my words, and stillthey came. This was the end of it--that Chaka saw the child sitting onthe knee of Unandi, his mother.

　　"What does my mother with that brat of thine, Mopo?" he asked of me."Cannot she kiss me, if she will find a child to kiss?" And he laughedlike a wolf.

　　I said that I did not know, and the matter passed over for awhile. Butafter that Chaka caused his mother to be watched. Now the boyUmslopogaas grew great and strong; there was no such lad of his yearsfor a day's journey round. But from a babe he was somewhat surly, offew words, and like his father, Chaka, afraid of nothing. In all theworld there were but two people whom he loved--these were I, Mopo, whowas called his father, and Nada, she who was said to be his twinsister.

　　Now it must be told of Nada that as the boy Umslopogaas was thestrongest and bravest of children, so the girl Nada was the gentlestand most fair. Of a truth, my father, I believe that her blood was notall Zulu, though this I cannot say for certain. At the least, her eyeswere softer and larger than those of our people, her hair longer andless tightly curled, and her skin was lighter--more of the colour ofpure copper. These things she had from her mother, Macropha; thoughshe was fairer than Macropha--fairer, indeed, than any woman of mypeople whom I have seen. Her mother, Macropha, my wife, was of Swaziblood, and was brought to the king's kraal with other captives after araid, and given to me as a wife by the king. It was said that she wasthe daughter of a Swazi headman of the tribe of the Halakazi, and thatshe was born of his wife is true, but whether he was her father I donot know; for I have heard from the lips of Macropha herself, thatbefore she was born there was a white man staying at her father'skraal. He was a Portuguese from the coast, a handsome man, and skilledin the working of iron. This white man loved the mother of my wife,Macropha, and some held that Macropha was his daughter, and not thatof the Swazi headman. At least I know this, that before my wife'sbirth the Swazi killed the white man. But none can tell the truth ofthese matters, and I only speak of them because the beauty of Nada wasrather as is the beauty of the white people than of ours, and thismight well happen if her grandfather chanced to be a white man.

　　Now Umslopogaas and Nada were always together. Together they ate,together they slept and wandered; they thought one thought and spokewith one tongue. Ou! it was pretty to see them! Twice while they werestill children did Umslopogaas save the life of Nada.

　　The first time it came about thus. The two children had wandered farfrom the kraal, seeking certain berries that little ones love. On theywandered and on, singing as they went, till at length they found theberries, and ate heartily. Then it was near sundown, and when they hadeaten they fell asleep. In the night they woke to find a great windblowing and a cold rain falling on them, for it was the beginning ofwinter, when fruits are ripe.

　　"Up, Nada!" said Umslopogaas, "we must seek the kraal or the cold willkill us."

　　So Nada rose, frightened, and hand in hand they stumbled through thedarkness. But in the wind and the night they lost their path, and whenat length the dawn came they were in a forest that was strange tothem. They rested awhile, and finding berries ate them, then walkedagain. All that day they wandered, till at last the night came down,and they plucked branches of trees and piled the branches over themfor warmth, and they were so weary that they fell asleep in eachother's arms. At dawn they rose, but now they were very tired andberries were few, sot hat by midday they were spent. Then they laydown on the side of a steep hill, and Nada laid her head upon thebreast of Umslopogaas.

　　"Here let us die, my brother," she said.

　　But even then the boy had a great spirit, and he answered, "Time todie, sister, when Death chooses us. See, now! Do you rest here, and Iwill climb the hill and look across the forest."

　　So he left her and climbed the hill, and on its side he found manyberries and a root that is good for food, and filled himself withthem. At length he came to the crest of the hill and looked out acrossthe sea of green. Lo! there, far away to the east, he saw a line ofwhite that lay like smoke against the black surface of a cliff, andknew it for the waterfall beyond the royal town. Then he came down thehill, shouting for joy and bearing roots and berries in his hand. Butwhen he reached the spot where Nada was, he found that her senses hadleft her through hunger, cold, and weariness. She lay upon the groundlike one asleep, and over her stood a jackal that fled as he drewnigh. Now it would seem that there but two shoots to the stick ofUmslopogaas. One was to save himself, and the other to lie down anddie by Nada. Yet he found a third, for, undoing the strips of hismoocha, he made ropes of them, and with the ropes he bound Nada on hisback and started for the king's kraal. He could never have reached it,for the way was long, yet at evening some messengers running throughthe forest came upon a naked lad with a girl bound to his back and astaff in his hand, who staggered along slowly with starting eyes andfoam upon his lips. He could not speak, he was so weary, and the ropeshad cut through the skin of his shoulders; yet one of the messengersknew him for Umslopogaas, the son of Mopo, and they bore him to thekraal. They would have left the girl Nada, thinking her dead, but hepointed to her breast, and, feeling it, they found that her heartstill beat, so they brought her also; and the end of it was that bothrecovered and loved each other more than ever before.

　　Now after this, I, Mopo, bade Umslopogaas stay at home within thekraal, and not lead his sister to the wilds. But the boy loved roaminglike a fox, and where he went there Nada followed. So it came aboutthat one day they slipped from the kraal when the gates were open, andsought out a certain deep glen which had an evil name, for it was saidthat spirits haunted it and put those to death who entered there.Whether this was true I do not know, but I know that in the glen dwelta certain woman of the woods, who had her habitation in a cave andlived upon what she could kill or steal or dig up with her hands. Nowthis woman was mad. For it had chanced that her husband had been"smelt out" by the witch-doctors as a worker of magic against theking, and slain. Then Chaka, according to custom, despatched theslayers to eat up his kraal, and they came to the kraal and killed hispeople. Last of all they killed his children, three young girls, andwould have assegaied their mother, when suddenly a spirit entered intoher at the sight, and she went mad, so that they let her go, beingafraid to touch her afterwards. So she fled and took up her abode inthe haunted glen; and this was the nature of her madness, thatwhenever she saw children, and more especially girl children, alonging came upon her to kill them as her own had been killed. This,indeed, she did often, for when the moon was full and her madness atits highest, she would travel far to find children, snatching themaway from the kraals like a hyena. Still, none would touch her becauseof the spirit in her, not even those whose children she had murdered.

　　So Umslopogaas and Nada came to the glen where the child-slayer lived,and sat down by a pool of water not far from the mouth of her cave,weaving flowers into a garland. Presently Umslopogaas left Nada, tosearch for rock lilies which she loved. As he went he called back toher, and his voice awoke the woman who was sleeping in her cave, forshe came out by night only, like a jackal. Then the woman steppedforth, smelling blood and having a spear in her hand. Presently shesaw Nada seated upon the grass weaving flowers, and crept towards herto kill her. Now as she came--so the child told me--suddenly a coldwind seemed to breathe upon Nada, and fear took hold of her, thoughshe did not see the woman who would murder her. She let fall theflowers, and looked before her into the pool, and there, mirrored inthe pool, she saw the greedy face of the child-slayer, who crept downupon her from above, her hair hanging about her brow and her eyesshining like the eyes of a lion.

　　Then with a cry Nada sprang up and fled along the path whichUmslopogaas had taken, and after her leapt and ran the mad woman.Umslopogaas heard her cry. He turned and rushed back over the brow ofthe hill, and, lo! there before him was the murderess. Already she hadgrasped Nada by the hair, already her spear was lifted to pierce her.Umslopogaas had no spear, he had nothing but a little stick without aknob; yet with it he rushed at the mad woman and struck her so smartlyon the arm that she let go of the girl and turned on him with a yell.Then, lifting her spear, she struck at him, but he leapt aside. Againshe struck; but he sprang into the air, and the spear passed beneathhim. A third time the woman struck, and, though he fell to earth toavoid the blow, yet the assegai pierced his shoulder. But the weightof his body as he fell twisted it from her hand, and before she couldgrasp him he was up, and beyond her reach, the spear still fast in hisshoulder.

　　Then the woman turned, screaming with rage and madness, and ran atNada to kill her with her hands. But Umslopogaas set his teeth, and,drawing the spear from his wound, charged her, shouting. She lifted agreat stone and hurled it at him--so hard that it flew into fragmentsagainst another stone which it struck; yet he charged on, and smote ather so truly that he drove the spear through her, and she fell downdead. After that Nada bound up his wound, which was deep, and withmuch pain he reached the king's kraal and told me this story.

　　Now there were some who cried that the boy must be put to death,because he had killed one possessed with a spirit. But I said no, heshould not be touched. He had killed the woman in defence of his ownlife and the life of his sister; and every one had a right to slay inself-defence, except as against the king or those who did the king'sbidding. Moreover, I said, if the woman had a spirit, it was an evilone, for no good spirit would ask the lives of children, but ratherthose of cattle, for it is against our custom to sacrifice humanbeings to the Amatonga even in war, though the Basuta dogs do so.Still, the tumult grew, for the witch-doctors were set upon the boy'sdeath, saying that evil would come of it if he was allowed to live,having killed one inspired, and at last the matter came to the ears ofthe king. Then Chaka summoned me and the boy before him, and he alsosummoned the witch-doctors.

　　First, the witch-doctors set out their case, demanding the death ofUmslopogaas. Chaka asked them what would happen if the boy was notkilled. They answered that the spirit of the dead woman would lead himto bring evil on the royal house. Chaka asked if he would bring evilon him, the king. They in turn asked the spirits, and answered no, noton him, but on one of the royal house who should be after him. Chakasaid that he cared nothing what happened to those who came after him,or whether good or evil befell them. Then he spoke to Umslopogaas, wholooked him boldly in the face, as an equal looks at an equal.

　　"Boy," he said, "what hast thou to say as to why thou shouldst not bekilled as these men demand?"

　　"This, Black One," answered Umslopogaas; "that I stabbed the woman indefence of my own life."

　　"That is nothing," said Chaka. "If I, the king, wished to kill thee,mightest thou therefore kill me or those whom I sent? The Itongo inthe woman was a Spirit King and ordered her to kill thee; thoushouldst then have let thyself be killed. Hast thou no other reason?"

　　"This, Elephant," answered Umslopogaas; "the woman would have murderedmy sister, whom I love better than my life."

　　"That is nothing," said Chaka. "If I ordered thee to be killed for anycause, should I not also order all within thy gates to be killed withthee? May not, then, a Spirit King do likewise? If thou hast nothingmore to say thou must die."

　　Now I grew afraid, for I feared lest Chaka should slay him who wascalled my son because of the word of the doctors. But the boyUmslopogaas looked up and answered boldly, not as one who pleads forhis life, but as one who demands a right:--

　　"I have this to say, Eater-up of Enemies, and if it is not enough, letus stop talking, and let me be killed. Thou, O king, didst commandthat this woman should be slain. Those whom thou didst send to destroyher spared her, because they thought her mad. I have carried out thecommandment of the king; I have slain her, mad or sane, whom the kingcommanded should be killed, and I have earned not death, but areward."

　　"Well said, Umslopogaas!" answered Chaka. "Let ten head of cattle begiven to this boy with the heart of a man; his father shall guard themfor him. Art thou satisfied now, Umslopogaas?"

　　"I take that which is due to me, and I thank the king because he neednot pay unless he will," Umslopogaas answered.

　　Chaka stared awhile, began to grow angry, then burst out laughing.

　　"Why, this calf is such another one as was dropped long ago in thekraal of Senzangacona!" he said. "As I was, so is this boy. Go on,lad, in that path, and thou mayst find those who shall cry the royalsalute of Bayete to thee at the end of it. Only keep out of my way,for two of a kind might not agree. Now begone!"

　　So we went out, but as we passed them I saw the doctors mutteringtogether, for they were ill-pleased and foreboded evil. Also they werejealous of me, and wished to smite me through the heart of him who wascalled my son.

　　CHAPTER VIII

　　THE GREAT INGOMBOCO

　　After this there was quiet until the Feast of the First-fruits wasended. But few people were killed at these feast, though there was agreat Ingomboco, or witch-hunt, and many were smelt out by the witch-doctors as working magic against the king. Now things had come to thispass in Zululand--that the whole people cowered before the witch-doctors. No man might sleep safe, for none knew but that on the morrowhe would be touched by the wand of an Isanusi, as we name a finder ofwitches, and led away to his death. For awhile Chaka said nothing, andso long as the doctors smelt out those only whom he wished to get ridof--and they were many--he was well pleased. But when they began towork for their own ends, and to do those to death whom he did notdesire to kill, he grew angry. Yet the custom of the land was that hewhom the witch-doctor touched must die, he and all his house;therefore the king was in a cleft stick, for he scarcely dared to saveeven those whom he loved. One night I came to doctor him, for he wassick in his mind. On that very day there had been an Ingomboco, andfive of the bravest captains of the army had been smelt out by theAbangoma, the witch-finders, together with many others. All had beendestroyed, and men had been sent to kill the wives and children of thedead. Now Chaka was very angry at this slaying, and opened his heartto me.

　　"The witch-doctors rule in Zululand, and not I, Mopo, son ofMakedama," he said to me. "Where, then, is it to end? Shall I myselfbe smelt out and slain? These Isanusis are too strong for me; they lieupon the land like the shadow of night. Tell me, how may I be free ofthem?"

　　"Those who walk the Bridge of Spears, O king, fall off into Nowhere,"I answered darkly; "even witch-doctors cannot keep a footing on thatbridge. Has not a witch-doctor a heart that can cease to beat? Has henot blood that can be made to flow?"

　　Chaka looked at me strangely. "Thou art a bold man who darest to speakthus to me, Mopo," he said. "Dost thou not know that it is sacrilegeto touch an Isanusi?"

　　"I speak that which is in the king's mind," I answered. "Hearken, Oking! It is indeed sacrilege to touch a true Isanusi, but what if theIsanusi be a liar? What if he smell out falsely, bringing those todeath who are innocent of evil? Is it then sacrilege to bring him tothat end which he has given to many another? Say, O king!"

　　"Good words!" answered Chaka. "Now tell me, son of Makedama, how maythis matter be put to proof?"

　　Then I leaned forward, whispering into the ear of the Black One, andhe nodded heavily.

　　Thus I spoke then, because I, too, saw the evil of the Isanusis, I whoknew their secrets. Also, I feared for my own life and for the livesof all those who were dear to me. For they hated me as one instructedin their magic, one who had the seeing eye and the hearing ear.

　　One morning thereafter a new thing came to pass in the royal kraal,for the king himself ran out, crying aloud to all people to come andsee the evil that had been worked upon him by a wizard. They cametogether and saw this. On the door-posts of the gateway of theIntunkulu, the house of the king, were great smears of blood. Theknees of men strong in the battle trembled when they saw it; womenwailed aloud as they wail over the dead; they wailed because of thehorror of the omen.

　　"Who has done this thing?" cried Chaka in a terrible voice. "Who hasdared to bewitch the king and to strike blood upon his house?"

　　There was no answer, and Chaka spoke again. "This is no littlematter," he said, "to be washed away with the blood of one or two andbe forgotten. The man who wrought it shall not die alone or travelwith a few to the world of spirits. All his tribe shall go with him,down to the baby in his hut and cattle in his kraal! Let messengers goout east and west, and north and south, and summon the witch-doctorsfrom every quarter! Let them summon the captains from every regimentand the headmen from every kraal! On the tenth day from now the circleof the Ingomboco must be set, and there shall be such a smelling outof wizards and of witches as has not been known in Zululand!"

　　So the messengers went out to do the bidding of the king, taking thenames of those who should be summoned from the lips of the indunas,and day by day people flocked up to the gates of the royal kraal, and,creeping on their knees before the majesty of the king, praised himaloud. But he vouchsafed an answer to none. One noble only he causedto be killed, because he carried in his hand a stick of the royal redwood, which Chaka himself had given him in bygone years.[1]

　　[1] This beautiful wood is known in Natal as "red ivory."--ED.

　　On the last night before the forming of the Ingomboco, the witch-doctors, male and female, entered the kraal. There were a hundred anda half of them, and they were made hideous and terrible with the whitebones of men, with bladders of fish and of oxen, with fat of wizards,and with skins of snakes. They walked in silence till they came infront of the Intunkulu, the royal house; then they stopped and sangthis song for the king to hear:--

　　We have come, O king, we have come from the caves and the rocksand the swamps,To wash in the blood of the slain;We have gathered our host from the air as vultures are gathered inwar.When they scent the blood of the slain.

　　We come not alone, O king: with each Wise One there passes aghost,Who hisses the name of the doomed.We come not alone, for we are the sons and Indunas of Death,And he guides our feet to the doomed.

　　Red rises the moon o'er the plain, red sinks the sun in the west,Look, wizards, and bid them farewell!We count you by hundreds, you who cried for a curse on the king.Ha! soon shall we bid YOU farewell!

　　Then they were silent, and went in silence to the place appointed forthem, there to pass the night in mutterings and magic. But those whowere gathered together shivered with fear when they heard their words,for they knew well that many a man would be switched with the gnu'stail before the sun sank once more. And I, too, trembled, for my heartwas full of fear. Ah! my father, those were evil days to live in whenChaka ruled, and death met us at every turn! Then no man might callhis life his own, or that of his wife or child, or anything. All werethe king's, and what war spared that the witch-doctors took.

　　The morning dawned heavily, and before it was well light the heraldswere out summoning all to the king's Ingomboco. Men came by hundreds,carrying short sticks only--for to be seen armed was death--and seatedthemselves in the great circle before the gates of the royal house.Oh! their looks were sad, and they had little stomach for eating thatmorning, they who were food for death. They seated themselves; thenround them on the outside of the circle gathered knots of warriors,chosen men, great and fierce, armed with kerries only. These were theslayers.

　　When all was ready, the king came out, followed by his indunas and byme. As he appeared, wrapped in the kaross of tiger-skins and toweringa head higher than any man there, all the multitude--and it was manyas the game on the hills--cast themselves to earth, and from every lipsharp and sudden went up the royal salute of Bayete. But Chaka took nonote; his brow was cloudy as a mountain-top. He cast one glance at thepeople and one at the slayers, and wherever his eye fell men turnedgrey with fear. Then he stalked on, and sat himself upon a stool tothe north of the great ring looking toward the open space.

　　For awhile there was silence; then from the gates of the women'squarters came a band of maidens arrayed in their beaded dancing-dresses, and carrying green branches in their hands. As they came,they clapped their hands and sang softly:--

　　We are the heralds of the king's feast. Ai! Ai!Vultures shall eat it. Ah! Ah!It is good--it is good to die for the king!

　　They ceased, and ranged themselves in a body behind us. Then Chakaheld up his hand, and there was a patter of running feet. Presentlyfrom behind the royal huts appeared the great company of the Abangoma,the witch-doctors--men to the right and women to the left. In the lefthand of each was the tail of a vilderbeeste, in the right a bundle ofassegais and a little shield. They were awful to see, and the bonesabout them rattled as they ran, the bladders and the snake-skinsfloated in the air behind them, their faces shone with the fat ofanointing, their eyes started like the eyes of fishes, and their lipstwitched hungrily as they glared round the death-ring. Ha! ha! littledid those evil children guess who should be the slayers and who shouldbe the slain before that sun sank!

　　On they came, like a grey company of the dead. On they came in silencebroken only by the patter of their feet and the dry rattling of theirbony necklets, till they stood in long ranks before the Black One.Awhile they stood thus, then suddenly every one of them thrust forwardthe little shield in his hand, and with a single voice they cried,"Hail, Father!"

　　"Hail, my children!" answered Chaka.

　　"What seekest thou, Father?" they cried again. "Blood?"

　　"The blood of the guilty," he answered.

　　They turned and spoke each to each; the company of the men spoke tothe company of the women.

　　"The Lion of the Zulu seeks blood."

　　"He shall be fed!" screamed the women.

　　"The Lion of the Zulu smells blood."

　　"He shall see it!" screamed the women.

　　"His eyes search out the wizards."

　　"He shall count their dead!" screamed the women.

　　"Peace!" cried Chaka. "Waste not the hours in talk, but to the work.Hearken! Wizards have bewitched me! Wizards have dared to smite bloodupon the gateways of the king. Dig in the burrows of the earth andfind them, ye rats! Fly through the paths of the air and find them, yevultures! Smell at the gates of the people and name them, ye jackals!ye hunters in the night! Drag them from the caves if they be hidden,from the distance if they be fled, from the graves if they be dead. Tothe work! to the work! Show them to me truly, and your gifts shall begreat; and for them, if they be a nation, they shall be slain. Nowbegin. Begin by companies of ten, for you are many, and all must befinished ere the sun sink."

　　"It shall be finished, Father," they answered.

　　Then ten of the women stood forward, and at their head was the mostfamous witch-doctress of that day--an aged woman named Nobela, a womanto whose eyes the darkness was no evil, whose scent was keen as adog's, who heard the voices of the dead as they cried in the night,and spoke truly of what she heard. All the other Isanusis, male andfemale, sat down in a half-moon facing the king, but this woman drewforward, and with her came nine of her sisterhood. They turned eastand west, north and south, searching the heavens; they turned east andwest, north and south, searching the earth; they turned east and west,north and south, searching the hears of men. Then they crept round andround the great ring like cats; then they threw themselves upon theearth and smelt it. And all the time there was silence, silence deepas midnight, and in it men hearkened to the beating of their hearts;only now and again the vultures shrieked in the trees.

　　At length Nobela spoke:--

　　"Do you smell him, sisters?"

　　"We smell him," they answered.

　　"Does he sit in the east, sisters?"

　　"He sits in the east," they answered.

　　"Is he the son of a stranger, sisters?"

　　"He is the son of a stranger."

　　Then they crept nearer, crept on their hands and knees, till they werewithin ten paces of where I sat among the indunas near to the king.The indunas looked on each other and grew grey with fear; and for me,my father, my knees were loosened and my marrow turned to water in mybones. For I knew well who was that son of a stranger of whom theyspoke. It was I, my father, I who was about to be smelt out; and if Iwas smelt out I should be killed with all my house, for the king'soath would scarcely avail me against the witch-doctors. I looked atthe fierce faces of the Isanusis before me, as they crept, crept likesnakes. I glanced behind and saw the slayers grasping their kerriesfor the deed of death, and I say I felt like one for whom thebitterness is overpast. Then I remembered the words which the king andI had whispered together of the cause for which this Ingomboco wasset, and hope crept back to me like the first gleam of the dawn upon astormy night. Still I did not hope overmuch, for it well might happenthat the king had but set a trap to catch me.

　　Now they were quite near and halted.

　　"Have we dreamed falsely, sisters?" asked Nobela, the aged.

　　"What we dreamed in the night we see in the day," they answered.

　　"Shall I whisper his name in your ears, sisters?"

　　They lifted their heads from the ground like snakes and nodded, and asthey nodded the necklets of bones rattled on their skinny necks. Thenthey drew their heads to a circle, and Nobela thrust hers into thecentre of the circle and said a word.

　　"Ha! ha!" they laughed, "we hear you! His is the name. Let him benamed by it in the face of Heaven, him and all his house; then let himhear no other name forever!"

　　And suddenly they sprang up and rushed towards me, Nobela, the agedIsanusi, at their head. They leaped at me, pointing to me with thetails of the vilderbeestes in their hands. Then Nobela switched me inthe face with the tail of the beast, and cried aloud:--

　　"Greeting, Mopo, son of Makedama! Thou art the man who smotest bloodon the door-posts of the king to bewitch the king. Let thy house bestamped flat!"

　　I saw her come, I felt the blow on my face as a man feels in a dream.I heard the feet of the slayers as they bounded forward to hale me tothe dreadful death, but my tongue clave to the roof of my mouth--Icould not say a word. I glanced at the king, and, as I did so, Ithought that I heard him mutter: "Near the mark, not in it."

　　Then he held up his spear, and all was silence. The slayers stopped intheir stride, the witch-doctors stood with outstretched arms, theworld of men was as though it had been frozen into sleep.

　　"Hold!" he said. "Stand aside, son of Makedama, who art named anevildoer! Stand aside, thou, Nobela, and those with thee who havenamed him evildoer! What? Shall I be satisfied with the life of onedog? Smell on, ye vultures, company by company, smell on! For the daythe labour, at night the feast!"

　　I rose, astonished, and stood on one side. The witch-doctresses alsostood on one side, wonderstruck, since no such smelling out as thishad been seen in the land. For till this hour, when a man was sweptwith the gnu's tail of the Isanusi that was the instant of his death.Why, then, men asked in their hearts, was the death delayed? Thewitch-doctors asked it also, and looked to the king for light, as menlook to a thunder-cloud for the flash. But from the Black One therecame no word.

　　So we stood on one side, and a second party of the Isanusi women begantheir rites. As the others had done, so they did, and yet they workedotherwise, for this is the fashion of the Isanusis, that no two ofthem smell out in the same way. And this party swept the faces ofcertain of the king's councillors, naming them guilty of the witch-work.

　　"Stand ye on one side!" said the king to those who had been smelt out;"and ye who have hunted out their wickedness, stand ye with those whonamed Mopo, son of Makedama. It well may be that all are guilty."

　　So these stood on one side also, and a third party took up the tale.And they named certain of the great generals, and were in turn biddento stand on one side together with those whom they had named.

　　So it went on through all the day. Company by company the women doomedtheir victims, till there were no more left in their number, and werecommanded to stand aside together with those whom they had doomed.Then the male Isanusis began, and I could see well that by this timetheir hearts were fearful, for they smelt a snare. Yet the king'sbidding must be done, and though their magic failed them here, victimsmust be found. So they smelt out this man and that man till we were agreat company of the doomed, who sat in silence on the ground lookingat each other with sad eyes and watching the sun, which we deemed ourlast, climb slowly down the sky. And ever as the day waned those whowere left untried of the witch-doctors grew madder and more fierce.They leaped into the air, they ground their teeth, and rolled upon theground. They drew forth snakes and devoured them alive, they shriekedout to the spirits and called upon the names of ancient kings.

　　At length it drew on to evening, and the last company of the witch-doctors did their work, smelling out some of the keepers of theEmposeni, the house of the women. But there was one man of theircompany, a young man and a tall, who held back and took no share inthe work, but stood by himself in the centre of the great circle,fixing his eyes on the heavens.

　　And when this company had been ordered to stand aside also togetherwith those whom they had smelt out, the king called aloud to the lastof the witch-doctors, asking him of his name and tribe, and why healone did not do his office.

　　"My name is Indabazimbi, the son of Arpi, O king," he answered, "and Iam of the tribe of the Maquilisini. Does the king bid me to smell outhim of whom the spirits have spoken to me as the worker of this deed?"

　　"I bid thee," said the king.

　　Then the young man Indabazimbi stepped straight forward across thering, making no cries or gestures, but as one who walks from his gateto the cattle kraal, and suddenly he struck the king in the face withthe tail in his hand, saying, "I smell out the Heavens above me!"[2]

　　[2] A Zulu title for the king.--ED.

　　Now a great gasp of wonder went up from the multitude, and all lookedto see this fool killed by torture. But Chaka rose and laughed aloud.

　　"Thou hast said it," he cried, "and thou alone! Listen, ye people! Idid the deed! I smote blood upon the gateways of my kraal; with my ownhand I smote it, that I might learn who were the true doctors and whowere the false! Now it seems that in the land of the Zulu there is onetrue doctor--this young man--and of the false, look at them and countthem, they are like the leaves. See! there they stand, and by themstand those whom they have doomed--the innocent whom, with their wivesand children, they have doomed to the death of the dog. Now I ask you,my people, what reward shall be given to them?"

　　Then a great roar went up from all the multitude, "Let them die, Oking!"

　　"Ay!" he answered. "Let them die as liars should!"

　　Now the Isanusis, men and women, screamed aloud in fear, and cried formercy, tearing themselves with their nails, for least of all thingsdid they desire to taste of their own medicine of death. But the kingonly laughed the more.

　　"Hearken ye!" he said, pointing to the crowd of us who had been smeltout. "Ye were doomed to death by these false prophets. Now glutyourselves upon them. Slay them, my children! slay them all! wipe themaway! stamp them out!--all! all, save this young man!"

　　Then we bounded from the ground, for our hearts were fierce with hateand with longing to avenge the terrors we had borne. The doomed slewthe doomers, while from the circle of the Ingomboco a great roar oflaughter went up, for men rejoiced because the burden of the witch-doctors had fallen from them.

　　At last it was done, and we drew back from the heap of the dead.Nothing was heard there now--no more cries or prayers or curses. Thewitch-fingers travelled the path on which they had set the feet ofmany. The king drew near to look. He came alone, and all who had donehis bidding bent their heads and crept past him, praising him as theywent. Only I stood still, covered, as I was with mire and filth, for Idid not fear to stand in the presence of the king. Chaka drew near,and looked at the piled-up heaps of the slain and the cloud of dustthat yet hung over them.

　　"There they lie, Mopo," he said. "There lie those who dared toprophecy falsely to the king! That was a good word of thine, Mopo,which taught me to set the snare for them; yet methought I saw theestart when Nobela, queen of the witch-doctresses, switched death onthee. Well, they are dead, and the land breathes more freely; and forthe evil which they have done, it is as yonder dust, that shall soonsink again to earth and there be lost."

　　Thus he spoke, then ceased--for lo! something moved beneath the cloudof dust, something broke a way through the heap of the dead. Slowly itforced its path, pushing the slain this way and that, till at lengthit stood upon its feet and tottered towards us--a thing dreadful tolook on. The shape was the shape of an aged woman, and even throughthe blood and mire I knew her. It was Nobela, she who had doomed me,she whom but now I had smitten to earth, but who had come back fromthe dead to curse me!

　　On she tottered, her apparel hanging round her in red rags, a hundredwounds upon her face and form. I saw that she was dying, but lifestill flickered in her, and the fire of hate burned in her snaky eyes.

　　"Hail, king!" she screamed.

　　"Peace, liar!" he answered; "thou art dead!"

　　"Not yet, king. I heard thy voice and the voice of yonder dog, whom Iwould have given to the jackals, and I will not die till I havespoken. I smelt him out this morning when I was alive; now that I amas one already dead, I smell him out again. He shall bewitch thee withblood indeed, Chaka--he and Unandi, thy mother, and Baleka, thy wife.Think of my words when the assegai reddens before thee for the lasttime, king! Farewell!" And she uttered a great cry and rolled upon theground dead.

　　"The witch lies hard and dies hard," said the king carelessly, andturned upon his heel. But those words of dead Nobela remained fixed inhis memory, or so much of them as had been spoken of Unandi andBaleka. There they remained like seeds in the earth, there they grewto bring forth fruit in their season.

　　And thus ended the great Ingomboco of Chaka, the greatest Ingombocothat ever was held in Zululand.

　　CHAPTER IX

　　THE LOSS OF UMSLOPOGAAS

　　Now, after the smelling out of the witch-doctors, Chaka caused a watchto be kept upon his mother Unandi, and his wife Baleka, my sister, andreport was brought to him by those who watched, that the two womencame to my huts by stealth, and there kissed and nursed a boy--one ofmy children. Then Chaka remembered the prophecy of Nobela, the deadIsanusi, and his heart grew dark with doubt. But to me he said nothingof the matter, for then, as always, his eyes looked over my head. Hedid not fear me or believe that I plotted against him, I who was hisdog. Still, he did this, though whether by chance or design I do notknow: he bade me go on a journey to a distant tribe that lived nearthe borders of the Amaswazi, there to take count of certain of theking's cattle which were in the charge of that tribe, and to bring himaccount of the tale of their increase. So I bowed before the king, andsaid that I would run like a dog to do his bidding, and he gave me mento go with me.

　　Then I returned to my huts to bid farewell to my wives and children,and there I found that my wife, Anadi, the mother of Moosa, my son,had fallen sick with a wandering sickness, for strange things cameinto her mind, and what came into her mind that she said, being, as Idid not doubt, bewitched by some enemy of my house.

　　Still, I must go upon the king's business, and I told this to my wifeMacropha, the mother of Nada, and, as it was thought, of Umslopogaas,the son of Chaka. But when I spoke to Macropha of the matter she burstinto tears and clung to me. I asked her why she wept thus, and sheanswered that the shadow of evil lay upon her heart, for she was surethat if I left her at the king's kraal, when I returned again I shouldfind neither her nor Nada, my child, nor Umslopogaas, who was named myson, and whom I loved as a son, still in the land of life. Then Itried to calm her; but the more I strove the more she wept, sayingthat she knew well that these things would be so.

　　Now I asked her what could be done, for I was stirred by her tears,and the dread of evil crept from her to me as shadows creep from thevalley to the mountain.

　　She answered, "Take me with you, my husband, that I may leave thisevil land, where the very skies rain blood, and let me rest awhile inthe place of my own people till the terror of Chaka has gone by."

　　"How can I do this?" I said. "None may leave the king's kraal withoutthe king's pass."

　　"A man may put away his wife," she replied. "The king does not standbetween a man and his wife. Say, my husband, that you love me nolonger, that I bear you no more children, and that therefore you sendme back whence I came. By-and-bye we will come together again if weare left among the living."

　　"So be it," I answered. "Leave the kraal with Nada and Umslopogaasthis night, and to-morrow morning meet me at the river bank, and weshall go on together, and for the rest may the spirits of our fathershold us safe."

　　So we kissed each other, and Macropha went on secretly with thechildren.

　　Now at the dawning on the morrow I summoned the men whom the king hadgiven me, and we started upon our journey. When the sun was well up wecame to the banks of the river, and there I found my wife Macropha,and with her the two children. They rose as I came, but I frowned atmy wife and she gave me no greeting. Those with me looked at heraskance.

　　"I have divorced this woman," I said to them. "She is a withered tree,a worn out old hag, and now I take her with me to send her to thecountry of the Swazis, whence she came. Cease weeping," I added toMacropha, "it is my last word."

　　"What says the king?" asked the men.

　　"I will answer to the king," I said. And we went on.

　　Now I must tell how we lost Umslopogaas, the son of Chaka, who wasthen a great lad drawing on to manhood, fierce in temper, well grownand broad for his years.

　　We had journeyed seven days, for the way was long, and on the night ofthe seventh day we came to a mountainous country in which there werefew kraals, for Chaka had eaten them all up years before. Perhaps youknow the place, my father. In it is a great and strange mountain. Itis haunted also, and named the Ghost Mountain, and on the top of it isa grey peak rudely shaped like the head of an aged woman. Here in thiswild place we must sleep, for darkness drew on. Now we soon learnedthat there were many lions in the rocks around, for we heard theirroaring and were much afraid, all except Umslopogaas, who fearednothing. So we made a circle of thorn-bushes and sat in it, holdingour assegais ready. Presently the moon came up--it was a full-grownmoon and very bright, so bright that we could see everything for along way round. Now some six spear-throws from where we sat was acliff, and at the top of the cliff was a cave, and in this cave livedtwo lions and their young. When the moon grew bright we saw the lionscome out and stand upon the edge of the cliff, and with them were twolittle ones that played about like kittens, so that had we not beenfrightened it would have been beautiful to see them.

　　"Oh! Umslopogaas," said Nada, "I wish that I had one of the littlelions for a dog."

　　The boy laughed, saying, "Then, shall I fetch you one, sister?"

　　"Peace, boy," I said. "No man may take young lions from their lair andlive."

　　"Such things have been done, my father," he answered, laughing. And nomore was said of the matter.

　　Now when the cubs had played awhile, we saw the lioness take up thecubs in her mouth and carry them into the cave. Then she came outagain, and went away with her mate to seek food, and soon we heardthem roaring in the distance. Now we stacked up the fire and went tosleep in our enclosure of thorns without fear, for we knew that thelions were far away eating game. But Umslopogaas did not sleep, for hehad determined that he would fetch the cub which Nada had desired,and, being young and foolhardy, he did not think of the danger whichhe would bring upon himself and all of us. He knew no fear, and now,as ever, if Nada spoke a word, nay, even if she thought of a thing todesire it, he would not rest till it was won for her. So while weslept Umslopogaas crept like a snake from the fence of thorns, and,taking an assegai in his hand, he slipped away to the foot of thecliff where the lions had their den. Then he climbed the cliff, and,coming to the cave, entered there and groped his way into it. The cubsheard him, and, thinking that it was their mother who returned, beganto whine and purr for food. Guided by the light of their yellow eyes,he crept over the bones, of which there were many in the cave, andcame to where they lay. Then he put out his hands and seized one ofthe cubs, killing the other with his assegai, because he could notcarry both of them. Now he made haste thence before the lionsreturned, and came back to the thorn fence where we lay just as dawnas breaking.

　　I awoke at the coming of the dawn, and, standing up, I looked out. Lo!there, on the farther side of the thorn fence, looking large in thegrey mist, stood the lad Umslopogaas, laughing. In his teeth he heldthe assegai, yet dripping with blood, and in his hands the lion cubthat, despite its whines and struggles, he grasped by the skin of theneck and the hind legs.

　　"Awake, my sister!" he cried; "here is the dog you seek. Ah! he bitesnow, but he will soon grow tame."

　　Nada awoke, and rising, cried out with joy at the sight of the cub,but for a moment I stood astonished.

　　"Fool!" I cried at last, "let the cub go before the lions come to rendus!"

　　"I will not let it go, my father," he answered sullenly. "Are therenot five of us with spears, and can we not fight two cats? I was notafraid to go alone into their den. Are you all afraid to meet them inthe open?"

　　"You are mad," I said; "let the cub go!" And I ran towards Umslopogaasto take it from him. But he sprang aside and avoided me.

　　"I will never let that go of which I have got hold," he said, "atleast not living!" And suddenly he seized the head of the cub andtwisted its neck; then threw it on to the ground, and added, "See, nowI have done your bidding, my father!"

　　As he spoke we heard a great sound of roaring from the cave in thecliff. The lions had returned and found one cub dead and the othergone.

　　"Into the fence!--back into the fence!" I cried, and we sprang overthe thorn-bushes where those with us were making ready their spears,trembling as they handled them with fear and the cold of the morning.We looked up. There, down the side of the cliff, came the lions,bounding on the scent of him who had robbed them of their young. Thelion ran first, and as he came he roared; then followed the lioness,but she did not roar, for in her mouth was the cub that Umslopogaashad assegaied in the cave. Now they drew near, mad with fury, theirmanes bristling, and lashing their flanks with their long tails.

　　"Curse you for a fool, son of Mopo," said one of the men with me toUmslopogaas; "presently I will beat you till the blood comes for thistrick."

　　"First beat the lions, then beat me if you can," answered the lad,"and wait to curse till you have done both."

　　Now the lions were close to us; they came to the body of the secondcub, that lay outside the fence of thorns. The lion stopped andsniffed it. Then he roared--ah! he roared till the earth shook. As forthe lioness, she dropped the dead cub which she was carrying, and tookthe other into her mouth, for she could not carry both.

　　"Get behind me, Nada," cried Umslopogaas, brandishing his spear, "thelion is about to spring."

　　As the words left his mouth the great brute crouched to the ground.Then suddenly he sprang from it like a bird, and like a bird hetravelled through the air towards us.

　　"Catch him on the spears!" cried Umslopogaas, and by nature, as itwere, we did the boy's bidding; for huddling ourselves together, weheld out the assegais so that the lion fell upon them as he sprang,and their blades sank far into him. But the weight of his chargecarried us to the ground, and he fell on to us, striking at us and atthe spears, and roaring with pain and fury as he struck. Presently hewas on his legs biting at the spears in his breast. Then Umslopogaas,who alone did not wait his onslaught, but had stepped aside for hisown ends, uttered a loud cry and drove his assegai into the lionbehind the shoulder, so that with a groan the brute rolled over dead.

　　Meanwhile, the lioness stood without the fence, the second dead cub inher mouth, for she could not bring herself to leave either of them.But when she heard her mate's last groan she dropped the cub andgathered herself together to spring. Umslopogaas alone stood up toface her, for he only had withdrawn his assegai from the carcass ofthe lion. She swept on towards the lad, who stood like a stone to meether. Now she met his spear, it sunk in, it snapped, and down fellUmslopogaas dead or senseless beneath the mass of the lioness. Shesprang up, the broken spear standing in her breast, sniffed atUmslopogaas, then, as though she knew that it was he who had robbedher, she seized him by the loins and moocha, and sprang with him overthe fence.

　　"Oh, save him!" cried the girl Nada in bitter woe. And we rushed afterthe lioness shouting.

　　For a moment she stood over her dead cubs, Umslopogaas hanging fromher mouth, and looked at them as though she wondered; and we hopedthat she might let him fall. Then, hearing our cries, she turned andbounded away towards the bush, bearing Umslopogaas in her mouth. Weseized our spears and followed; but the ground grew stony, and, searchas we would, we could find no trace of Umslopogaas or of the lioness.They had vanished like a cloud. So we came back, and, ah! my heart wassore, for I loved the lad as though he had indeed been my son. But Iknew that he was dead, and there was an end.

　　"Where is my brother?" cried Nada when we came back.

　　"Lost," I answered. "Lost, never to be found again."

　　Then the girl gave a great and bitter cry, and fell to the earthsaying, "I would that I were dead with my brother!"

　　"Let us be going," said Macropha, my wife.

　　"Have you no tears to weep for your son?" asked a man of our company.

　　"What is the use of weeping over the dead? Does it, then, bring themback?" she answered. "Let us be going!"

　　The man thought these words strange, but he did not know thatUmslopogaas was not born of Macropha.

　　Still, we waited in that place a day, thinking that, perhaps, thelioness would return to her den and that, at least, we might kill her.But she came back no more. So on the next morning we rolled up ourblankets and started forward on our journey, sad at heart. In truth,Nada was so weak from grief that she could hardly travel, but I neverheard the name of Umslopogaas pass her lips again during that journey.She buried him in her heart and said nothing. And I too said nothing,but I wondered why it had been brought about that I should save thelife of Umslopogaas from the jaws of the Lion of Zulu, that thelioness of the rocks might devour him.

　　And so the time went on till we reached the kraal where the king'sbusiness must be done, and where I and my wife should part.

　　On the morning after we came to the kraal, having kissed in secret,though in public we looked sullenly on one another, we parted as thosepart who meet no more, for it was in our thoughts, that we shouldnever see each other's face again, nor, indeed, did we do so. And Idrew Nada aside and spoke to her thus: "We part, my daughter; nor do Iknow when we shall meet again, for the times are troubled and it isfor your safety and that of your mother that I rob my eyes of thesight of you. Nada, you will soon be a woman, and you will be fairerthan any woman among our people, and it may come about that many greatmen will seek you in marriage, and, perhaps, that I, your father,shall not be there to choose for you whom you shall wed, according tothe custom of our land. But I charge you, as far as may be possiblefor you to do so, take only a man whom you can love, and be faithfulto him alone, for thus shall a woman find happiness."

　　Here I stopped, for the girl took hold of my hand and looked into myface. "Peace, my father," she said, "do not speak to me of marriage,for I will wed no man, now that Umslopogaas is dead because of myfoolishness. I will live and die alone, and, oh! may I die quickly,that I may go to seek him whom I love only!"

　　"Nay, Nada," I said, "Umslopogaas was your brother, and it is notfitting that you should speak of him thus, even though he is dead."

　　"I know nothing of such matters, my father," she said. "I speak whatmy heart tells me, and it tells me that I loved Umslopogaas living,and, though he is dead, I shall love him alone to the end. Ah! youthink me but a child, yet my heart is large, and it does not lie tome."

　　Now I upbraided the girl no more, because I knew that Umslopogaas wasnot her brother, but one whom she might have married. Only I marvelledthat the voice of nature should speak so truly in her, telling herthat which was lawful, even when it seemed to be most unlawful.

　　"Speak no more of Umslopogaas," I said, "for surely he is dead, andthough you cannot forget him, yet speak of him no more, and I pray ofyou, my daughter, that if we do not meet again, yet you should keep mein your memory, and the love I bear you, and the words which from timeto time I have said to you. The world is a thorny wilderness, mydaughter, and its thorns are watered with a rain of blood, and wewander in our wretchedness like lost travellers in a mist; nor do Iknow why our feet are set on this wandering. But at last there comesan end, and we die and go hence, none know where, but perhaps where wego the evil may change to the good, and those who were dear to eachother on the earth may become yet dearer in the heavens; for I believethat man is not born to perish altogether, but is rather gatheredagain to the Umkulunkulu who sent him on his journeyings. Thereforekeep hope, my daughter, for if these things are not so, at least sleepremains, and sleep is soft, and so farewell."

　　Then we kissed and parted, and I watched Macropha, my wife, and Nada,my daughter, till they melted into the sky, as they walked upon theirjourney to Swaziland, and was very sad, because, having lostUmslopogaas, he who in after days was named the Slaughterer and theWoodpecker, I must lose them also.

　　CHAPTER X

　　THE TRIAL OF MOPO

　　Now I sat four days in the huts of the tribe whither I had been sent,and did the king's business. And on the fifth morning I rose up,together with those with me, and we turned our faces towards theking's kraal. But when we had journeyed a little way we met a party ofsoldiers, who commanded us to stand.

　　"What is it, king's men?" I asked boldly.

　　"This, son of Makedama," answered their spokesman: "give over to usyour wife Macropha and your children Umslopogaas and Nada, that we maydo with them as the king commands."

　　"Umslopogaas," I answered, "has gone where the king's arm cannotstretch, for he is dead; and for my wife Macropha and my daughterNada, they are by now in the caves of the Swazis, and the king mustseek them there with an army if he will find them. To Macropha he iswelcome, for I hate her, and have divorced her; and as for the girl,well, there are many girls, and it is no great matter if she lives ordies, yet I pray him to spare her."

　　Thus I spoke carelessly, for I knew well that my wife and child werebeyond the reach of Chaka.

　　"You do well to ask the girl's life," said the soldier, laughing, "forall those born to you are dead, by order of the king."

　　"Is it indeed so?" I answered calmly, though my knees shook and mytongue clove to my lips. "The will of the king be done. A cut stickputs out new leaves; I can have more children."

　　"Ay, Mopo; but first you must get new wives, for yours are dead also,all five of them."

　　"Is it indeed so?" I answered. "The king's will be done. I wearied ofthose brawling women."

　　"So, Mopo," said the soldier; "but to get other wives and have morechildren born to you, you must live yourself, for no children are bornto the dead, and I think that Chaka has an assegai which you shallkiss."

　　"Is it so?" I answered. "The king's will be done. The sun is hot, andI tire of the road. He who kisses the assegai sleeps sound."

　　Thus I spoke, my father, and, indeed, in that hour I desired to die.The world was empty for me. Macropha and Nada were gone, Umslopogaaswas dead, and my other wives and children were murdered. I had noheart to begin to build up a new house, none were left for me to love,and it seemed well that I should die also.

　　The soldiers asked those with me if that tale was true which I told ofthe death of Umslopogaas and of the going of Macropha and Nada intoSwaziland. They said, Yes, it was true. Then the soldiers said thatthey would lead me back to the king, and I wondered at this, for Ithought that they would kill me where I stood. So we went on, andpiece by piece I learned what had happened at the king's kraal.

　　On the day after I left, it came to the ears of Chaka, by the mouth ofhis spies, that my second wife--Anadi--was sick and spoke strangewords in her sickness. Then, taking three soldiers with him, he wentto my kraal at the death of the day. He left the three soldiers by thegates of the kraal, bidding them to suffer none to come in or go out,but Chaka himself entered the large hut where Anadi lay sick, havinghis toy assegai, with the shaft of the royal red wood, in his hand.Now, as it chanced, in the hut were Unandi, the mother of Chaka, andBaleka, my sister, the wife of Chaka, for, not knowing that I hadtaken away Umslopogaas, the son of Baleka, according to their custom,these two foolish women had come to kiss and fondle the lad. But whenthey entered the hut they found it full of my other wives andchildren. These they sent away, all except Moosa, the son of Anadi--that boy who was born eight days before Umslopogaas, the son of Chaka.But they kept Moosa in the hut, and kissed him, giving him imphi[1] toeat, fearing lest it should seem strange to the women, my wives, if,Umslopogaas being gone, they refused to take notice of any otherchild.

　　[1] A variety of sugar-cane.--ED.

　　Now as they sat this, presently the doorway was darkened, and, behold!the king himself crept through it, and saw them fondling the childMoosa. When they knew who it was that entered, the women flungthemselves upon the ground before him and praised him. But he smiledgrimly, and bade them be seated. Then he spoke to them, saying, "Youwonder, Unandi, my mother, and Baleka, my wife, why it is that I amcome here into the hut of Mopo, son of Makedama. I will tell you: itis because he is away upon my business, and I hear that his wife Anadiis sick--it is she who lies there, is it not? Therefore, as the firstdoctor in the land, I am come to cure her, Unandi, my mother, andBaleka, my sister."

　　Thus he spoke, eyeing them as he did so, and taking snuff from theblade of his little assegai, and though his words were gentle theyshook with fear, for when Chaka spoke thus gently he meant death tomany. But Unandi, Mother of the Heavens, answered, saying that it waswell that the king had come, since his medicine would bring rest andpeace to her who lay sick.

　　"Yes," he answered; "it is well. It is pleasant, moreover, my motherand sister, to see you kissing yonder child. Surely, were he of yourown blood you could not love him more."

　　Now they trembled again, and prayed in their hearts that Anadi, thesick woman, who lay asleep, might not wake and utter foolish words inher wandering. But the prayer was answered from below and not fromabove, for Anadi woke, and, hearing the voice of the king, her sickmind flew to him whom she believed to be the king's child.

　　"Ah!" she said, sitting upon the ground and pointing to her own son,Moosa, who squatted frightened against the wall of the hut. "Kiss him,Mother of the Heavens, kiss him! Whom do they call him, the young cubwho brings ill-fortune to our doors? They call him the son of Mopo andMacropha!" And she laughed wildly, stopped speaking, and sank backupon the bed of skins.

　　"They call him the son of Mopo and Macropha," said the king in a lowvoice. "Whose son is he, then, woman?"

　　"Oh, ask her not, O king," cried his mother and his wife, castingthemselves upon the ground before him, for they were mad with fear."Ask her not; she has strange fancies such as are not meet for yourears to hear. She is bewitched, and has dreams and fancies."

　　"Peace!" he answered. "I will listen to this woman's wanderings.Perhaps some star of truth shines in her darkness, and I would seelight. Who, then, is he, woman?"

　　"Who is he?" she answered. "Are you a fool that ask who he is? He is--hush!--put your ear close--let me speak low lest the reeds of the hutspeak it to the king. He is--do you listen? He is--the son of Chakaand Baleka, the sister of Mopo, the changeling whom Unandi, Mother ofthe Heavens, palmed off upon this house to bring a curse on it, andwhom she would lead out before the people when the land is weary ofthe wickedness of the king, her son, to take the place of the king."

　　"It is false, O king!" cried the two women. "Do not listen to her; itis false. The boy is her own son, Moosa, whom she does not know in hersickness."

　　But Chaka stood up in the hut and laughed terribly. "Truly, Nobelaprophesied well," he cried, "and I did ill to slay her. So this is thetrick thou hast played upon me, my mother. Thou wouldst give a son toto me who will have no son: thou wouldst give me a son to kill me.Good! Mother of the Heavens, take thou the doom of the Heavens! Thouwouldst give me a son to slay me and rule in my place; now, in turn,I, thy son, will rob me of a mother. Die, Unandi!--die at the handthou didst bring forth!" And he lifted the little assegai and smote itthrough her.

　　For a moment Unandi, Mother of the Heavens, wife of Senzangacona,stood uttering no cry. Then she put up her hand, and drew the assegaifrom her side.

　　"So shalt thou die also, Chaka the Evil!" she cried, and fell downdead there in the hut.

　　Thus, then, did Chaka murder his mother Unandi.

　　Now when Baleka saw what had been done, she turned and fled from thehut into the Emposeni, and so swiftly that the guards at the gatescould not stop her. But when she reached her own hut Baleka's strengthfailed her, and she fell senseless on the ground. But the boy Moosa,my son, being overcome with terror, stayed where he was, and Chaka,believing him to be his son, murdered him also, and with his own hand.

　　Then he stalked out of the hut, and leaving the three guards at thegate, commanded a company of soldiers to surround the kraal and fireit. This they did, and as the people rushed out they killed them, andthose who did not run out were burned in the fire. Thus, then,perished all my wives, my children, my servants, and those who werewithin the gates in their company. The tree was burned, and the beesin it, and I alone was left living--I and Macropha and Nada, who werefar away.

　　Nor was Chaka yet satisfied with blood, for, as has been told, he sentmessengers bidding them kill Macropha, my wife, and Nada, my daughter,and him who was named by son. But he commanded the messengers thatthey should not slay me, but bring me living before them.

　　Now when the soldiers did not kill me I took counsel with myself, forit was my belief that I was saved alive only that I might die later,and in a more cruel fashion. Therefore for awhile I thought that itwould be well if I did that for myself which another purposed to dofor me. Why should I, who was already doomed, wait to meet my doom?What had I left to keep me in the place of life, seeing that all whomI loved were dead or gone? To die would be easy, for I knew the waysof death. In my girdle I carried a secret medicine; he who eats of it,my father, will see the sun's shadow move no more, and will never lookupon the stars again. But I was minded to know the assegai or thekerrie; nor would I perish more slowly beneath the knives of thetormentors, nor be parched by the pangs of thirst, or wander eyelessto my end. Therefore it was that, since I had sat in the doom ringlooking hour after hour into the face of death, I had borne thismedicine with me by night and by day. Surely now was the time to useit.

　　So I thought as I sat through the watches of the night, ay! and drewout the bitter drug and laid it on my tongue. But as I did so Iremembered my daughter Nada, who was left to me, though she sojournedin a far country, and my wife Macropha and my sister Baleka, who stilllived, so said the soldiers, though how it came about that the kinghad not killed her I did not know then. Also another thought was bornin my heart. While life remained to me, I might be revenged upon himwho had wrought me this woe; but can the dead strike? Alas! the deadare strengthless, and if they still have hearts to suffer, they haveno hands to give back blow for blow. Nay, I would live on. Time to diewhen death could no more be put away. Time to die when the voice ofChaka spoke my doom. Death chooses for himself and answers noquestions; he is a guest to whom none need open the door of his hut,for when he wills he can pass through the thatch like air. Not yetwould I taste of that medicine of mine.

　　So I lived on, my father, and the soldiers led me back to the kraal ofChaka. Now when we came to the kraal it was night, for the sun hadsunk as we passed through the gates. Still, as he had been commanded,the captain of those who watched me went in before the king and toldhim that I lay without in bonds. And the king said, "Let him bebrought before me, who was my physician, that I may tell him how Ihave doctored those of his house."

　　So they took me and led me to the royal house, and pushed me throughthe doorway of the great hut.

　　Now a fire burned in the hut, for the night was cold, and Chaka sat onthe further side of the fire, looking towards the opening of the hut,and the smoke from the fire wreathed him round, and its light shoneupon his face and flickered in his terrible eyes.

　　At the door of the hut certain councillors seized me by the arms anddragged me towards the fire. But I broke from them, and prostratingmyself, for my arms were free, I praised the king and called him byhis royal names. The councillors sprang towards me to seize me again,but Chaka said, "Let him be; I would talk with my servant." Then thecouncillors bowed themselves on either side, and laid their hands ontheir sticks, their foreheads touching the ground. But I sat down onthe floor of the hut over against the king, and we talked through thefire.

　　"Tell me of the cattle that I sent thee to number, Mopo, son ofMakedama," said Chaka. "Have my servants dealt honestly with mycattle?"

　　"They have dealt honestly, O king," I answered.

　　"Tell me, then, of the number of the cattle and of their markings,Mopo, forgetting none."

　　So I sat and told him, ox by ox, cow by cow, and heifer by heifer,forgetting none; and Chaka listened silently as one who is asleep. ButI knew that he did not sleep, for all the while the firelightflickered in his fierce eyes. Also I knew that he did but torment me,or that, perhaps, he would learn of the cattle before he killed me. Atlength all the tale was told.

　　"So," said the king, "it goes well. There are yet honest men left inthe land. Knowest thou, Mopo, that sorrow has come upon thy housewhile thou wast about my business."

　　"I have heard it, O king!" I answered, as one who speaks of a smallmatter.

　　"Yes, Mopo, sorrow has come upon thy house, the curse of Heaven hasfallen upon thy kraal. They tell me, Mopo, that the fire from aboveran briskly through they huts."

　　"I have heard it, I king!"

　　"They tell me, Mopo, that those within thy gates grew mad at the sightof the fire, and dreaming there was no escape, that they stabbedthemselves with assegais or leaped into the flames."

　　"I have heard it, O king! What of it? Any river is deep enough todrown a fool!"

　　"Thou hast heard these things, Mopo, but thou hast not yet heard all.Knowest thou, Mopo, that among those who died in thy kraal was she whobore me, she who was named Mother of the Heavens?"

　　Then, my father, I, Mopo, acted wisely, because of the thought whichmy good spirit gave me, for I cast myself upon the ground, and wailedaloud as though in utter grief.

　　"Spare my ears, Black One!" I wailed. "Tell me not that she who borethee is dead, O Lion of the Zulu. For the others, what is it? It is abreath of wind, it is a drop of water; but this trouble is as the galeor as the sea."

　　"Cease, my servant, cease!" said the mocking voice of Chaka; "but knowthis, thou hast done well to grieve aloud, because the Mother of theHeavens is no more, and ill wouldst thou have done to grieve becausethe fire from above has kissed thy gates. For hadst thou done thislast thing or left the first undone, I should have known that thyheart was wicked, and by now thou wouldst have wept indeed--tears ofblood, Mopo. It is well for thee, then, that thou hast read my riddlearight."

　　Now I saw the depths of the pit that Chaka had dug for me, and blessedmy Ehlose who had put into my heart those words which I should answer.I hoped also that Chaka would now let me go; but it was not to be, forthis was but the beginning of my trial.

　　"Knowest thou, Mopo," said the king, "that as my mother died yonder inthe flames of thy kraal she cried out strange and terrible words whichcame to my ears through the singing of the fire. These were her words:that thou, Mopo, and thy sister Baleka, and thy wives, had conspiredtogether to give a child to me who would be childless. These were herwords, the words that came to me through the singing of the fire. Tellme now, Mopo, where are those children that thou leddest from thykraal, the boy with the lion eyes who is named Umslopogaas, and thegirl who is named Nada?"

　　"Umslopogaas is dead by the lion's mouth, O king!" I answered, "andNada sits in the Swazi caves." And I told him of the death ofUmslopogaas and of how I had divorced Macropha, my wife.

　　"The boy with the lion eyes to the lion's mouth!" said Chaka. "Enoughof him; he is gone. Nada may yet be sought for with the assegai in theSwazi caves; enough of her. Let us speak of this song that my mother--who, alas! is dead, Mopo--this song she sang through the singing ofthe flames. Tell me, Mopo, tell me now, was it a true tale."

　　"Nay, O king! surely the Mother of the Heavens was maddened by theHeavens when she sang that song," I answered. "I know nothing of it, Oking."

　　"Thou knowest naught of it, Mopo?" said the king. And again he lookedat me terribly through the reek of the fire. "Thou knowest naught ofit, Mopo? Surely thou art a-cold; thy hands shake with cold. Nay, man,fear not--warm them, warm them, Mopo. See, now, plunge that hand ofthine into the heart of the flame!" And he pointed with his littleassegai, the assegai handled with the royal wood, to where the fireglowed reddest--ay, he pointed and laughed.

　　Then, my father, I grew cold indeed--yes, I grew cold who soon shouldbe hot, for I saw the purpose of Chaka. He would put me to the trialby fire.

　　For a moment I sat silent, thinking. Then the king spoke again in agreat voice: "Nay, Mopo, be not so backward; shall I sit warm and seethee suffer cold? What, my councillors, rise, take the hand of Mopo,and hold it to the flame, that his heart may rejoice in the warmth ofthe flame while we speak together of this matter of the child thatwas, so my mother sang, born to Baleka, my wife, the sister of Mopo,my servant."

　　"There is little need for that, O king," I answered, being made boldby fear, for I saw that if I did nothing death would swiftly end mydoubts. Once, indeed, I bethought me of the poison that I bore, andwas minded to swallow it and make an end, but the desire to live isgreat, and keen is the thirst for vengeance, so I said to my heart,"Not yet awhile; I will endure this also; afterwards, if need be, Ican die."

　　"I thank the king for his graciousness, and I will warm me at thefire. Speak on, O king, while I warm myself, and thou shalt hear truewords," I said boldly.

　　Then, my father, I stretched out my left hand and plunged it into thefire--not into the hottest of the fire, but where the smoke leapt fromthe flame. Now my flesh was wet with the sweat of fear, and for alittle moment the flames curled round it and did not burn me. But Iknew that the torment was to come.

　　For a short while Chaka watched me, smiling. Then he spoke slowly,that the fire might find time to do its work.

　　"Say, then, Mopo, thou knowest nothing of this matter of the birth ofa son to thy sister Baleka?"

　　"I know this only, O king!" I answered, "that a son was born in pastyears to thy wife Baleka, that I killed the child in obedience to thyword, and laid its body before thee."

　　Now, my father, the steam from my flesh had been drawn from my hand bythe heat, and the flame got hold of me and ate into my flesh, and itstorment was great. But of this I showed no sign upon my face, for Iknew well that if I showed sign or uttered cry, then, having failed inthe trial, death would be my portion.

　　Then the king spoke again, "Dost thou swear by my head, Mopo, that noson of mine was suckled in thy kraals?"

　　"I swear it, O king! I swear it by thy head," I answered.

　　And now, my father, the agony of the fire was such as may not be told.I felt my eyes start forward in their sockets, my blood seemed to boilwithin me, it rushed into my head, and down my face their ran twotears of blood. But yet I held my hand in the fire and made no sign,while the king and his councillors watched me curiously. Still, for amoment Chaka said nothing, and that moment seemed to me as all theyears of my life.

　　"Ah!" he said at length, "I see that thou growest warm, Mopo! Withdrawthy hand from the flame. I am answered; thou hast passed the trial;thy heart is clean; for had there been lies in it the fire had giventhem tongue, and thou hadst cried aloud, making thy last music, Mopo!"

　　Now I took my hand from the flame, and for awhile the torment left me.

　　"It is well, O king," I said calmly. "Fire has no power of hurt onthose whose heart is pure."

　　But as I spoke I looked at my left hand. It was black, my father--black as a charred stick, and the nails were gone from the twistedfingers. Look at it now, my father; you can see, though my eyes areblind. The hand is white, like yours--it is white and dead andshrivelled. These are the marks of the fire in Chaka's hut--the firethat kissed me many, many years ago; I have had but little use of thathand since this night of torment. But my right arm yet remained to me,my father, and, ah! I used it.

　　"It seems that Nobela, the doctress, who is dead, lied when sheprophesied evil on me from thee, Mopo," said Chaka again. "It seemsthat thou art innocent of this offence, and that Baleka, thy sister,is innocent, and that the song which the Mother of the Heavens sangthrough the singing flames was no true song. It is well for thee,Mopo, for in such a matter my oath had not helped thee. But my motheris dead--dead in the flames with thy wives and children, Mopo, and inthis there is witchcraft. We will have a mourning, Mopo, thou and I,such a mourning as has not been seen in Zululand, for all the peopleon the earth shall weep at it. And there shall be a 'smelling out' atthis mourning, Mopo. But we will summon no witch-doctors, thou and Iwill be witch-doctors, and ourselves shall smell out those who havebrought these woes upon us. What! shall my mother die unavenged, shewho bore me and has perished by witchcraft, and shall thy wives andchildren die unavenged--thou being innocent? Go forth, Mopo, myfaithful servant, whom I have honoured with the warmth of my fire, goforth!" And once again he stared at me through the reek of the flame,and pointed with his assegai to the door of the hut.

　　CHAPTER XI

　　THE COUNSEL OF BALEKA

　　I rose, I praised the king with a loud voice, and I went from theIntunkulu, the house of the king. I walked slowly through the gates,but when I was without the gates the anguish that took me because ofmy burnt hand was more than I could bear. I ran to and fro groaningtill I came to the hut of one whom I knew. There I found fat, andhaving plunged my hand in the fat, I wrapped it round with a skin andpassed out again, for I could not stay still. I went to and fro, tillat length I reached the spot where my huts had been. The outer fenceof the huts still stood; the fire had not caught it. I passed throughthe fence; there within were the ashes of the burnt huts--they layankle-deep. I walked in among the ashes; my feet struck upon thingsthat were sharp. The moon was bright, and I looked; they were theblackened bones of my wives and children. I flung myself down in theashes in bitterness of heart; I covered myself over with the ashes ofmy kraal and with the bones of my wives and children. Yes, my father,there I lay, and on me were the ashes, and among the ashes were thebones. Thus, then, did I lie for the last time in my kraal, and wassheltered from the frost of the night by the dust of those to whom Ihad given life. Such were the things that befell us in the days ofChaka, my father; yes, not to me alone, but to many another also.

　　I lay among the ashes and groaned with the pain of my burn, andgroaned also from the desolation of my heart. Why had I not tasted thepoison, there in the hut of Chaka, and before the eyes of Chaka? Whydid I not taste it now and make an end? Nay, I had endured the agony;I would not give him this last triumph over me. Now, having passed thefire, once more I should be great in the land, and I would becomegreat. Yes, I would bear my sorrows, and become great, that in a dayto be I might wreak vengeance on the king. Ah! my father, there, as Irolled among the ashes, I prayed to the Amatongo, to the ghosts of myancestors. I prayed to my Ehlose, to the spirit that watches me--ay,and I even dared to pray to the Umkulunkulu, the great soul of theworld, who moves through the heavens and the earth unseen and unheard.And thus I prayed, that I might yet live to kill Chaka as he hadkilled those who were dear to me. And while I prayed I slept, or, if Idid not sleep, the light of thought went out of me, and I became asone dead. Then there came a vision to me, a vision that was sent inanswer to my prayer, or, perchance, it was a madness born of mysorrows. For, my father, it seemed to me that I stood upon the bank ofa great and wide river. It was gloomy there, the light lay low uponthe face of the river, but far away on the farther side was a glowlike the glow of a stormy dawn, and in the glow I saw a mighty bed ofreeds that swayed about in the breath of dawn, and out of the reedscame men and women and children, by hundreds and thousands, andplunged into the waters of the river and were buffeted about by them.Now, my father, all the people that I saw in the water were blackpeople, and all those who were torn out of the reeds were black--theywee none of them white like your people, my father, for this visionwas a vision of the Zulu race, who alone are "torn out of the reeds."Now, I saw that of those who swam in the river some passed over veryquickly and some stood still, as it were, still in the water--as inlife, my father, some die soon and some live for many years. And I sawthe countless faces of those in the water, among them were many that Iknew. There, my father, I saw the face of Chaka, and near him was myown face; there, too, I saw the face of Dingaan, the prince, hisbrother, and the face of the boy Umslopogaas and the face of Nada, mydaughter, and then for the first time I knew that Umslopogaas was notdead, but only lost.

　　Now I turned in my vision, and looked at that bank of the river onwhich I stood. Then I saw that behind the bank was a cliff, mighty andblack, and in the cliff were doors of ivory, and through them camelight and the sound of laughter; there were other doors also, black asthough fashioned of coal, and through them came darkness and thesounds of groans. I saw also that in front of the doors was set aseat, and on the seat was the figure of a glorious woman. She wastall, and she alone was white, and clad in robes of white, and herhair was like gold which is molten in the fire, and her face shonelike the midday sun. Then I saw that those who came up out of theriver stood before the woman, the water yet running from them, andcried aloud to her.

　　"Hail, Inkosazana-y-Zulu! Hail, Queen of the Heavens!"

　　Now the figure of the glorious woman held a rod in either hand, andthe rod in her right hand was white and of ivory, and the rod in herleft hand was black and of ebony. And as those who came up before herthrone greeted her, so she pointed now with the wand of ivory in herright hand, and now with the wand of ebony in her left hand. And withthe wand of ivory she pointed to the gates of ivory, through whichcame light and laughter, and with the wand of ebony she pointed to thegates of coal, through which came blackness and groans. And as shepointed, so those who greeted her turned, and went, some through thegates of light and some through the gates of blackness.

　　Presently, as I stood, a handful of people came up from the bank ofthe river. I looked on them and knew them. There was Unandi, themother of Chaka, there was Anadi, my wife, and Moosa, my son, and allmy other wives and children, and those who had perished with them.

　　They stood before the figure of the woman, the Princess of theHeavens, to whom the Umkulunkulu has given it to watch over the peopleof the Zulu, and cried aloud, "Hail, Inkosazana-y-Zulu! Hail!"

　　Then she, the Inkosazana, pointed with the rod of ivory to the gatesof ivory; but still they stood before her, not moving. Now the womanspoke for the first time, in a low voice that was sad and awful tohear.

　　"Pass in, children of my people, pass in to the judgment. Why tarryye? Pass in through the gates of light."

　　But still they tarried, and in my vision Unandi spoke: "We tarry,Queen of the Heavens--we tarry to pray for justice on him who murderedus. I, who on earth was named Mother of the Heavens, on behalf of allthis company, pray to thee, Queen of the Heavens, for justice on himwho murdered us."

　　"How is he named?" asked the voice that was low and awful.

　　"Chaka, king of the Zulus," answered the voice of Unandi. "Chaka, myson."

　　"Many have come to ask for vengeance on that head," said the voice ofthe Queen of the Heavens, "and many more shall come. Fear not, Unandi,it shall fall. Fear not, Anadi and ye wives and children of Mopo, itshall fall, I say. With the spear that pierced thy breast, Unandi,shall the breast of Chaka be also pierced, and, ye wives and childrenof Mopo, the hand that pierces shall be the hand of Mopo. As I guidehim so shall he go. Ay, I will teach him to wreak my vengeance on theearth! Pass in, children of my people--pass in to the judgment, forthe doom of Chaka is written."

　　Thus I dreamed, my father. Ay, this was the vision that was sent me asI lay in pain and misery among the bones of my dead in the ashes of mykraal. Thus it was given me to see the Inkosazana of the Heavens asshe is in her own place. Twice more I saw her, as you shall hear, butthat was on the earth and with my waking eyes. Yes, thrice has it beengiven to me in all to look upon that face that I shall now see no moretill I am dead, for no man may look four times on the Inkosazana andlive. Or am I mad, my father, and did I weave these visions from thewoof of my madness? I do not know, but it is true that I seemed to seethem.

　　I woke when the sky was grey with the morning light; it was the painof my burnt hand that aroused me from my sleep or from my stupor. Irose shaking the ashes from me, and went without the kraal to washaway their defilement. Then I returned, and sat outside the gates ofthe Emposeni, waiting till the king's women, whom he named hissisters, should come to draw water according to their custom. At lastthey came, and, sitting with my kaross thrown over my face to hide it,looked for the passing of Baleka. Presently I saw her; she was sad-faced, and walked slowly, her pitcher on her head. I whispered hername, and she drew aside behind an aloe bush, and, making pretencethat her foot was pierced with a thorn, she lingered till the otherwomen had gone by. Then she came up to me, and we greeted one another,gazing heavily into each other's eyes.

　　"In an ill day did I hearken to you, Baleka," I said, "to you and tothe Mother of the Heavens, and save your child alive. See now what hassprung from this seed! Dead are all my house, dead is the Mother ofthe Heavens--all are dead--and I myself have been put to the tormentby fire," and I held out my withered hand towards her.

　　"Ay, Mopo, my brother," she answered, "but flesh is nearest to flesh,and I should think little of it were not my son Umslopogaas also dead,as I have heard but now."

　　"You speak like a woman, Baleka. Is it, then, nothing to you that I,your brother, have lost--all I love?"

　　"Fresh seed can yet be raised up to you, my brother, but for me thereis no hope, for the king looks on me no more. I grieve for you, but Ihad this one alone, and flesh is nearest to flesh. Think you that Ishall escape? I tell you nay. I am but spared for a little, then I gowhere the others have gone. Chaka has marked me for the grave; for alittle while I may be left, then I die: he does but play with me as aleopard plays with a wounded buck. I care not, I am weary, but Igrieve for the boy; there was no such boy in the land. Would that Imight die swiftly and go to seek him."

　　"And if the boy is not dead, Baleka, what then?"

　　"What is that you said?" she answered, turning on me with wild eyes."Oh, say it again--again, Mopo! I would gladly die a hundred deaths toknow that Umslopogaas still lives."

　　"Nay, Baleka, I know nothing. But last night I dreamed a dream," and Itold her all my dream, and also of that which had gone before thedream.

　　She listened as one listens to the words of a king when he passesjudgement for life or for death.

　　"I think that there is wisdom in your dreams, Mopo," she said atlength. "You were ever a strange man, to whom the gates of distanceare no bar. Now it is borne in upon my heart that Umslopogaas stilllives, and now I shall die happy. Yes, gainsay me not; I shall die, Iknow it. I read it in the king's eyes. But what is it? It is nothing,if only the prince Umslopogaas yet lives."

　　"Your love is great, woman," I said; "and this love of yours hasbrought many woes upon us, and it may well happen that in the end itshall all be for nothing, for there is an evil fate upon us. Say now,what shall I do? Shall I fly, or shall I abide here, taking the chanceof things?"

　　"You must stay here, Mopo. See, now! This is in the king's mind. Hefears because of the death of his mother at his own hand--yes, evenhe; he is afraid lest the people should turn upon him who killed hisown mother. Therefore he will give it out that he did not kill her,but that she perished in the fire which was called down upon yourkraals by witchcraft; and, though all men know the lie, yet none shalldare to gainsay him. As he said to you, there will be a smelling out,but a smelling out of a new sort, for he and you shall be the witch-finders, and at that smelling out he will give to death all those whomhe fears, all those whom he knows hate him for his wickedness andbecause with his own hand he slew his mother. For this cause, then, hewill save you alive, Mopo--yes, and make you great in the land, forif, indeed, his mother Unandi died through witchcraft, as he shallsay, are you not also wronged by him, and did not your wives andchildren also perish by witchcraft? Therefore, do not fly; abide hereand become great--become great to the great end of vengeance, Mopo, mybrother. You have much wrong to wreak; soon you will have more, for I,too, shall be gone, and my blood also shall cry for vengeance to you.Hearken, Mopo. Are there not other princes in the land? What ofDingaan, what of Umhlangana, what of Umpanda, brothers to the king? Donot these also desire to be kings? Do they not day by day rise fromsleep feeling their limbs to know if they yet live, do they not nightby night lie down to sleep not knowing if it shall be their wives thatthey shall kiss ere dawn or the red assegai of the king? Draw near tothem, my brother; creep into their hearts and learn their counsel orteach them yours; so in the end shall Chaka be brought to that gatethrough which your wives have passed, and where I also am about totread."

　　Thus Baleka spoke and she was gone, leaving me pondering, for herwords were heavy with wisdom. I knew well that the brothers of theking went heavily and in fear of death, for his shadow was on them.With Panda, indeed, little could be done, for he lived softly,speaking always as one whose wits are few. But Dingaan and Umhlanganawere of another wood, and from them might be fashioned a kerrie thatshould scatter the brains of Chaka to the birds. But the time to speakwas not now; not yet was the cup of Chaka full.

　　Then, having finished my thought, I rose, and, going to the kraal ofmy friend, I doctored my burnt hand, that pained me, and as I wasdoctoring it there came a messenger to me summoning me before theking.

　　I went in before the king, and prostrated myself, calling him by hisroyal names; but he took me by the hand and raised me up, speakingsoftly.

　　"Rise, Mopo, my servant!" he said. "Thou hast suffered much woebecause of the witchcraft of thine enemies. I, I have lost my mother,and thou, thou hast lost thy wives and children. Weep, my councillors,weep, because I have lost my mother, and Mopo, my servant, as lost hiswives and children, by the witchcraft of our foes!"

　　Then all the councillors wept aloud, while Chaka glared at them.

　　"Hearken, Mopo!" said the king, when the weeping was done. "None cangive me back my mother; but I can give thee more wives, and thou shaltfind children. Go in among the damsels who are reserved to the king,and choose thee six; go in among the cattle of the king, and choosethee ten times ten of the best; call upon the servants of the kingthat they build up thy kraal greater and fairer than it was before!These things I give thee freely; but thou shalt have more, Mopo--yes!thou shalt have vengeance! On the first day of the new moon I summon agreat meeting, a bandhla of all the Zulu people: yes, thine own tribe,the Langeni, shall be there also. Then we will mourn together over ourwoes; then, too, we will learn who brought these woes upon us. Go now,Mopo, go! And go ye also, my councillors, leaving me to weep alonebecause my mother is dead!"

　　Thus, then, my father, did the words of Baleka come true, and thus,because of the crafty policy of Chaka, I grew greater in the land thanever I had been before. I chose the cattle, they were fat; I chose thewives, they were fair; but I took no pleasure in them, nor were anymore children born to me. For my heart was like a withered stick; thesap and strength had gone from my heart--it was drawn out in the fireof Chaka's hut, and lost in my sorrow for those whom I had loved.

　　CHAPTER XII

　　THE TALE OF GALAZI THE WOLF

　　Now, my father, I will go back a little, for my tale is long and windsin and out like a river in a plain, and tell of the fate ofUmslopogaas when the lion had taken him, as he told it to me in theafter years.

　　The lioness bounded away, and in her mouth was Umslopogaas. Once hestruggled, but she bit him hard, so he lay quiet in her mouth, andlooking back he saw the face of Nada as she ran from the fence ofthorns, crying "Save him!" He saw her face, he heard her words, thenhe saw and heard little more, for the world grew dark to him and hepassed, as it were, into a deep sleep. Presently Umslopogaas awokeagain, feeling pain in his thigh, where the lioness had bitten him,and heard a sound of shouting. He looked up; near to him stood thelioness that had loosed him from her jaws. She was snorting with rage,and in front of her was a lad long and strong, with a grim face, and awolf's hide, black and grey, bound about his shoulders in such fashionthat the upper jar and teeth of the wolf rested on his head. He stoodbefore the lioness, shouting, and in one hand he held a large war-shield, and in the other he grasped a heavy club shod with iron.

　　Now the lioness crouched herself to spring, growling terribly, but thelad with the club did not wait for her onset. He ran in upon her andstruck her on the head with the club. He smote hard and well, but thisdid not kill her, for she reared herself upon her hind legs and struckat him heavily. He caught the blow upon his shield, but the shield wasdriven against his breast so strongly that he fell backwards beneathit, and lay there howling like a wolf in pain. Then the lioness sprangupon him and worried him. Still, because of the shield, as yet shecould not come at him to slay him; but Umslopogaas saw that this mightnot endure, for presently the shield would be torn aside and thestranger must be killed. Now in the breast of the lioness still stoodthe half of Umslopogaas's broken spear, and its blade was a span deepin her breast. Then this thought came into the mind of Umslopogaas,that he would drive the spear home or die. So he rose swiftly, forstrength came back to him in his need, and ran to where the lionessworried at him who lay beneath the shield. She did not heed him, so heflung himself upon his knees before her, and, seizing the haft of thebroken spear, drive it deep into her and wrenched it round. Now shesaw Umslopogaas and turned roaring, and clawed at him, tearing hisbreast and arms. Then, as he lay, he heard a mighty howling, and,behold! grey wolves and black leaped upon the lioness and rent andworried her till she fell and was torn to pieces by them. After thisthe senses of Umslopogaas left him again, and the light went out ofhis eyes so that he was as one dead.

　　At length his mind came back to him, and with it his memory, and heremembered the lioness and looked up to find her. But he did not findher, and he saw that he lay in a cave upon a bed of grass, while allabout him were the skins of beasts, and at his side was a pot filledwith water. He put out his hand and, taking the pot, drank of thewater, and then he saw that his arm was wasted as with sickness, andthat his breast was thick with scars scarcely skinned over.

　　Now while he lay and wondered, the mouth of the cave was darkened, andthrough it entered that same lad who had done battle with the lionessand been overthrown by her, bearing a dead buck upon his shoulders. Heput down the buck upon the ground, and, walking to where Umslopogaaslay, looked at him.

　　"Ou!" he said, "your eyes are open--do you, then, live, stranger?"

　　"I live," answered Umslopogaas, "and I am hungry."

　　"It is time," said the other, "since with toil I bore you here throughthe forest, for twelve days you have lain without sense, drinkingwater only. So deeply had the lion clawed you that I thought of you asdead. Twice I was near to killing you, that you might cease to sufferand I to be troubled; but I held my hand, because of a word which cameto me from one who is dead. Now eat, that your strength may return toyou. Afterwards, we will talk."

　　So Umslopogaas ate, and little by little his health returned to him--every day a little. And afterwards, as they sat at night by the firein the cave they spoke together.

　　"How are you named?" asked Umslopogaas of the other.

　　"I am named Galazi the Wolf," he answered, "and I am of Zulu blood--ay, of the blood of Chaka the king; for the father of Senzangacona,the father of Chaka, was my great-grandfather."

　　"Whence came you, Galazi?"

　　"I came from Swaziland--from the tribe of the Halakazi, which I shouldrule. This is the story: Siguyana, my grandfather, was a youngerbrother of Senzangacona, the father of Chaka. But he quarrelled withSenzangacona, and became a wanderer. With certain of the people of theUmtetwa he wandered into Swaziland, and sojourned with the Halakazitribe in their great caves; and the end of it was that he killed thechief of the tribe and took his place. After he was dead, my fatherruled in his place; but there was a great party in the tribe thathated his rule because he was of the Zulu race, and it would have setup a chief of the old Swazi blood in his place. Still, they could notdo this, for my father's hand was heavy on the people. Now I was theonly son of my father by his head wife, and born to be chief afterhim, and therefore those of the Swazi party, and they were many andgreat, hated me also. So matters stood till last year in the winter,and then my father set his heart on killing twenty of the headmen,with their wives and children, because he knew that they plottedagainst him. But the headmen learned what was to come, and theyprevailed upon a wife of my father, a woman of their own blood, topoison him. So she poisoned him in the night and in the morning it wastold me that my father lay sick and summoned me, and I went to him. Inhis hut I found him, and he was writhing with pain.

　　"'What is it, my father?' I said. 'Who has done this evil?'

　　"'It is this, my son,' he gasped, 'that I am poisoned, and she standsyonder who has done the deed.' And he pointed to the woman, who stoodat the side of the hut near the door, her chin upon her breast,trembling as she looked upon the fruit of her wickedness.

　　"Now the girl was young and fair, and we had been friends, yet I saythat I did not pause, for my heart was mad within me. I did not pause,but, seizing my spear, I ran at her, and, though she cried for mercy,I killed her with the spear.

　　"'That was well done, Galazi!' said my father. 'But when I am gone,look to yourself, my son, for these Swazi dogs will drive you out androb you of your place! But if they drive you out and you still live,swear this to me--that you will not rest till you have avenged me.'

　　"'I swear it, my father,' I answered. 'I swear that I will stamp outthe men of the tribe of Halakazi, every one of them, except those ofmy own blood, and bring their women to slavery and their children tobonds!'

　　"'Big words for a young mouth,' said my father. 'Yet shall you live tobring these things about, Galazi. This I know of you now in my hour ofdeath: you shall be a wanderer for a few years of your life, child ofSiguyana, and wandering in another land you shall die a man's death,and not such a death as yonder witch has given to me.' Then, havingspoken thus, he lifted up his head, looked at me, and with a greatgroan he died.

　　"Now I passed out of the hut dragging the body of the dead girl afterme. In front of the hut were gathered many headmen waiting for theend, and I saw that their looks were sullen.

　　"'The chief, my father, is dead!' I cried in a loud voice, 'and I,Galazi, who am the chief, have slain her who murdered him!' And Irolled the body of the girl over on to her back so that they mightlook upon her face.

　　"Now the father of the girl was among those who stood before me, hewho had persuaded her to the deed, and he was maddened at the sight.

　　"'What, my brothers?' he cried. 'Shall we suffer that this young Zuludog, this murderer of a girl, be chief over us? Never! The old lion isdead, now for the cub!' And he ran at me with spear aloft.

　　"'Never!' shouted the others, and they, too, ran towards me, shakingtheir spears.

　　"I waited, I did not hasten, for I knew well that I should not diethen, I knew it from my father's last words. I waited till the man wasnear me; he thrust, I sprang aside and drove my spear through him, andon the daughter's body the father fell dead. Then I shouted aloud andrushed through them. None touched me; none could catch me; the mandoes not live who can overtake me when my feet are on the ground and Iam away."

　　"Yet I might try," said Umslopogaas, smiling, for of all lads amongthe Zulus he was the swiftest of foot.

　　"First walk again, then run," answered Galazi.

　　"Take up the tale," quoth Umslopogaas; "it is a merry one."

　　"Something is left to tell, stranger. I fled from the country of theHalakazi, nor did I linger at all in the land of the Swazis, but cameon swiftly into the Zulu. Now, it was in my mind to go to Chaka andtell him of my wrongs, asking that he would send an impi to make anend of the Halakazi. But while I journeyed, finding food and shelteras I might, I came one night to the kraal of an old man who knewChaka, and had known Siguyana, my grandfather, and to him, when I hadstayed there two days, I told my tale. But the old man counselled meagainst my plan, saying that Chaka, the king, did not love to welcomenew shoots sprung from the royal stock, and would kill me; moreover,the man offered me a place in his kraal. Now, I held that there waswisdom in his words, and thought no more of standing before the kingto cry for justice, for he who cries to kings for justice sometimesfinds death. Still, I would not stay in the kraal of the old man, forhe had sons to come after him who looked on me with no liking;moreover, I wished to be a chief myself, even if I lived alone. So Ileft the kraal by night and walked on, not knowing where I should go.

　　"Now, on the third night, I came to a little kraal that stands on thefarther side of the river at the foot of the mountain. In front of thekraal sat a very old woman basking in the rays of the setting sun. Shesaw me, and spoke to me, saying, 'Young man, you are tall and strongand swift of foot. Would you earn a famous weapon, a club, thatdestroys all who stand before it?'

　　"I said that I wished to have such a club, and asked what I should doto win it.

　　"'You shall do this,' said the old woman: 'to-morrow morning, at thefirst light, you shall go up to yonder mountain,' and she pointed tothe mountain where you are now, stranger, on which the stone Witchsits forever waiting for the world to die. 'Two-thirds of the way upthe mountain you will come to a path that is difficult to climb. Youshall climb the path and enter a gloomy forest. It is very dark in theforest, but you must push through it till you come to an open placewith a wall of rock behind it. In the wall of rock is a cave, and inthe cave you will find the bones of a man. Bring down the bones in abag, and I will give you the club!'

　　"While she spoke thus people came out of the kraal and listened.

　　"'Do not heed her, young man,' they said, 'unless you are weary oflife. Do not heed her: she is crazy. The mountain is haunted; it is aplace of ghosts. Look at the stone Witch who sits upon it! Evilspirits live in that forest, and no man has walked there for manyyears. This woman's son was foolish: he went to wander in the forest,saying that he cared nothing for ghosts, and the Amatongo, the ghost-folk, killed him. That was many years ago, and none have dared to seekhis bones. Ever she sits here and asks of the passers by that theyshould bring him to her, offering the great club for a reward; butthey dare not!'

　　"'They lie!' said the old woman. 'There are no ghosts there. Theghosts live only in their cowardly hearts; there are but wolves. Iknow that the bones of my son lie in the cave, for I have seen them ina dream; but, alas! my old limbs are too weak to carry me up themountain path, and all these are cowards; there is no man among themsince the Zulus killed my husband, covering him with wounds!'

　　"Now, I listened, answering nothing; but when all had done, I asked tosee the club which should be given to him who dared to face theAmatongo, the spirits who lived in the forest upon the Ghost Mountain.Then the old woman rose, and creeping on her hands went into the hut.Presently she returned again, dragging the great club after her.

　　"Look at it, stranger! look at it! Was there ever such a club?" AndGalazi held it up before the eyes of Umslopogaas.

　　In truth, my father, that was a club, for I, Mopo, saw it in afterdays. It was great and knotty, black as iron that had been smoked inthe fire, and shod with metal that was worn smooth with smiting.

　　"I looked at it," went on Galazi, "and I tell you, stranger, a greatdesire came into my heart to possess it.

　　"'How is this club named?' I asked of the old woman.

　　"'It is named Watcher of the Fords,' she answered, 'and it has notwatched in vain. Five men have held that club in war and a hundred-and-seventy-three have given up their lives beneath its strokes. Hewho held it last slew twenty before he was slain himself, for thisfortune goes with the club--that he who owns it shall die holding it,but in a noble fashion. There is but one other weapon to match with itin Zululand, and that is the great axe of Jikiza, the chief of thePeople of the Axe, who dwells in the kraal yonder; the ancient horn-hafted Imbubuzi, the Groan-Maker, that brings victory. Were axe,Groan-Maker, and club, Watcher of the Fords, side by side, there areno thirty men in Zululand who could stand before them. I have said.Choose!' And the aged woman watched me cunningly through her hornyeyes.

　　"'She speaks truly now,' said one of those who stood near. 'Let theclub be, young man: he who owns it smites great blows indeed, but inthe end he dies by the assegai. None dare own the Watcher of theFords.'

　　"'A good death and a swift!' I answered. And pondered a time, whilestill the old woman watched me through her horny eyes. At length sherose, 'La!, la!' she said, 'the Watcher is not for this one. This isbut a child, I must seek me a man, I must seek me a man!'

　　"'Not so fast, old wife,' I said. 'Will you lend me this club to holdin my hand while I go to find the bones of your son and to snatch themfrom the people of the ghosts?'

　　"'Lend you the Watcher, boy? Nay, nay! I should see little of youagain or of the good club either.'

　　"'I am no thief,' I answered. 'If the ghosts kill me, you will see meno more, or the club either; but if I live I will bring you back thebones, or, if I do not find them, I will render the Watcher into yourhands again. At the least I say that if you will not lend me the club,then I will not go into the haunted place.'

　　"'Boy, your eyes are honest,' she said, still peering at me. 'Take theWatcher, go seek the bones. If you die, let the club be lost with you;if you fail, bring it back to me; but if you win the bones, then it isyours, and it shall bring you glory and you shall die a man's death atlast holding him aloft among the dead.'

　　"So on the morrow at dawn I took the club Watcher in my hand and alittle dancing shield, and made ready to start. The old woman blessedme and bade me farewell, but the other people of the kraal mocked,saying: 'A little man for so big a club! Beware, little man, lest theghosts use the club on you!' So they spoke, but one girl in the kraal--she is a granddaughter of the old woman--led me aside, praying menot to go, for the forest on the Ghost Mountain had an evil name: nonedared walk there, since it was certainly full of spirits, who howledlike wolves. I thanked the girl, but to the others I said nothing,only I asked of the path to the Ghost Mountain.

　　"Now stranger, if you have strength, come to the mouth of the cave andlook out, for the moon is bright."

　　So Umslopogaas rose and crept through the narrow mouth of the cave.There, above him, a great grey peak towered high into the air, shapedlike a seated woman, her chin resting upon her breast, the place wherethe cave was being, as it were, on the lap of the woman. Below thisplace the rock sloped sharply, and was clothed with little bushes.Lower down yet was a forest, great and dense, that stretched to thetop of a cliff, and at the foot of the cliff, beyond the waters of theriver, lay the wide plains of Zululand.

　　"Yonder, stranger," said Galazi, pointing with the club Watcher of theFords far away to the plain beneath; "yonder is the kraal where theaged woman dwelt. There is a cliff rising from the plain, up which Imust climb; there is the forest where dwell the Amatongo, the peopleof the ghosts; there, on the hither side of the forest, runs the pathto the cave, and here is the cave itself. See this stone lying at themouth of the cave, it turns thus, shutting up the entrance hole--itturns gently; though it is so large, a child may move it, for it restsupon a sharp point of rock. Only mark this, the stone must be pushedtoo far; for, look! if it came to here," and he pointed to a mark inthe mouth of the cave, "then that man need be strong who can draw itback again, though I have done it myself, who am not a man full grown.But if it pass beyond this mark, then, see, it will roll down the neckof the cave like a pebble down the neck of a gourd, and I think thattwo men, one striving from within and one dragging from without,scarcely could avail to push it clear. Look now, I close the stone, asis my custom of a night, so,"--and he grasped the rock and swung itround upon its pivot, on which it turned as a door turns. "Thus Ileave it, and though, except those to whom the secret is know, nonewould guess that a cave was here, yet it can be rolled back again witha push of the hand. But enough of the stone. Enter again, wanderer,and I will go forward with my tale, for it is long and strange.

　　"I started from the kraal of the old woman, and the people of thekraal followed me to the brink of the river. It was in flood, and fewhad dared to cross it.

　　"'Ha! ha!' they cried, 'now your journey is done, little man; watch bythe ford you who would win the Watcher of the Ford! Beat the waterwith the club, perhaps so it shall grow gentle that your feet may passit!'

　　"I answered nothing to their mocking, only I bound the shield upon myshoulders with a string, and the bag that I had brought I made fastabout my middle, and I held the great club in my teeth by the thong.Then I plunged into the river and swam. Twice, stranger, the currentbore me under, and those on the bank shouted that I was lost; but Irose again, and in the end I won the farther shore.

　　"Now those on the bank mocked no more; they stood still wondering, andI walked on till I came to the foot of the cliff. That cliff is hardto climb, stranger; when you are strong upon your feet, I will showyou the path. Yet I found a way up it, and by midday I came to theforest. Here, on the edge of the forest, I rested awhile, and ate alittle food that I had brought with me in the bag, for now I mustgather up my strength to meet the ghosts, if ghosts there were. Then Irose and plunged into the forest. The trees were great that growthere, stranger, and their leaves are so think that in certain placesthe light is as that of night when the moon is young. Still, I wendedon, often losing my path. But from time to time between the tops ofthe trees I saw the figure of the grey stone woman who sits on the topof Ghost Mountain, and shaped my course towards her knees. My heartbeat as I travelled through the forest in dark and loneliness likethat of the night, and ever I looked round searching for the eyes ofthe Amatongo. But I saw no spirits, though at times great spottedsnakes crept from before my feet, and perhaps these were the Amatongo.At times, also, I caught glimpses of some grey wolf as he slunk fromtree to tree watching me, and always high above my head the windsighed in the great boughs with a sound like the sighing of women.

　　"Still, I went on, singing to myself as I went, that my heart mightnot be faint with fear, and at length, towards the end of the secondhour, the trees grew fewer, the ground sloped upwards, and the lightpoured down from the heavens again. But, stranger, you are weary, andthe night wears on; sleep now, and to-morrow I will end the tale. Say,first, how are you named?"

　　"I am named Umslopogaas, son of Mopo," he answered, "and my tale shallbe told when yours is done; let us sleep!"

　　Now when Galazi heard this name he started and was troubled, but saidnothing. So they laid them down to sleep, and Galazi wrappedUmslopogaas with the skins of bucks.

　　But Galazi the Wolf was so hardy that he lay on the bare ground andhad no covering. So they slept, and without the door of the cave thewolves howled, scenting the blood of men.

　　CHAPTER XIII

　　GALAZI BECOMES KING OF THE WOLVES

　　On the morrow Umslopogaas awoke, and knew that strength was growing onhim fast. Still, all that day he rested in the cave, while Galazi wentout to hunt. In the evening he returned, bearing a buck upon hisshoulders, and they skinned the buck and ate of it as they sat by thefire. And when the sun was down Galazi took up his tale.

　　"Now Umslopogaas, son of Mopo, hear! I had passed the forest, and hadcome, as it were, to the legs of the old stone Witch who sits up aloftthere forever waiting for the world to die. Here the sun shonemerrily, here lizards ran and birds flew to and fro, and though itgrew towards the evening--for I had wandered long in the forest--I wasafraid no more. So I climbed up the steep rock, where little bushesgrow like hair on the arms of a man, till at last I came to the kneesof the stone Witch, which are the space before the cave. I lifted byhead over the brink of the rock and looked, and I tell you,Umslopogaas, my blood ran cold and my heart turned to water, forthere, before the cave, rolled wolves, many and great. Some slept andgrowled in their sleep, some gnawed at the skulls of dead game, somesat up like dogs and their tongues hung from their grinning jaws. Ilooked, I saw, and beyond I discovered the mouth of the cave, wherethe bones of the boy should be. But I had no wish to come there, beingafraid of the wolves, for now I knew that these were the ghosts wholive upon the mountain. So I bethought me that I would fly, and turnedto go. And, Umslopogaas, even as I turned, the great club Watcher ofthe Fords swung round and smote me on the back with such a blow as aman smites upon a coward. Now whether this was by chance or whetherthe Watcher would shame him who bore it, say you, for I do not know.At the least, shame entered into me. Should I go back to be mocked bythe people of the kraal and by the old woman? And if I wished to go,should I not be killed by the ghosts at night in the forest? Nay, itwas better to die in the jaws of the wolves, and at once.

　　"Thus I thought in my heart; then, tarrying not, lest fear should comeupon me again, I swung up the Watcher, and crying aloud the war-cry ofthe Halakazi, I sprang over the brink of the rock and rushed upon thewolves. They, too, sprang up and stood howling, with bristling hidesand fiery eyes, and the smell of them came into my nostrils. Yet whenthey saw it was a man that rushed upon them, they were seized withsudden fear and fled this way and that, leaping by great bounds fromthe place of rock, which is the knees of the stone Witch, so thatpresently I stood alone in front of the cave. Now, having conqueredthe wolf ghosts and no blow struck, my heart swelled within me, and Iwalked to the mouth of the cave proudly, as a cock walks upon a roof,and looked in through the opening. As it chanced, the sinking sunshone at this hour full into the cave, so that all its darkness wasmade red with light. Then, once more, Umslopogaas, I grew afraidindeed, for I could see the end of the cave.

　　"Look now! There is a hole in the wall of the cave, where thefirelight falls below the shadow of the roof, twice the height of aman from the floor. It is a narrow hole and a high, is it not?--asthough one had cut it with iron, and a man might sit in it, his legshanging towards the floor of the cave. Ay, Umslopogaas, a man mightsit in it, might he not? And there a man sat, or that which had been aman. There sat the bones of a man, and the black skin had withered onhis bones, holding them together, and making him awful to see. Hishands were open beside him, he leaned upon them, and in the right handwas a piece of hide from his moocha. It was half eaten, Umslopogaas;he had eaten it before he died. His eyes also were bound round with aband of leather, as though to hide something from their gaze, one footwas gone, one hung over the edge of the niche towards the floor, andbeneath it on the floor, red with rust, lay the blade of a brokenspear.

　　"Now come hither, Umslopogaas, place your hand upon the wall of thecave, just here; it is smooth, is it not?--smooth as the stones onwhich women grind their corn. 'What made it so smooth?' you ask. Iwill tell you.

　　"When I peered through the door of the cave I saw this: on the floorof the cave lay a she-wolf panting, as though she had galloped many amile; she was great and fierce. Near to her was another wolf--he was adog--old and black, bigger than any I have seen, a very father ofwolves, and all his head and flanks were streaked with grey. But thiswolf was on his feet. As I watched he drew back nearly to the mouth ofthe cave, then of a sudden he ran forward and bounded high into theair towards the withered foot of that which hung from the cleft of therock. His pads struck upon the rock here where it is smooth, and therefor a second he seemed to cling, while his great jaws closed with aclash but a spear's breadth beneath the dead man's foot. Then he fellback with a howl of rage, and drew slowly down the cave. Again he ranand leaped, again the great jaws closed, again he fell down howling.Then the she-wolf rose, and they sprang together, striving to pulldown him who sat above. But it was all in vain; they could never comenearer than within a spear's breadth of the dead man's foot. And now,Umslopogaas, you know why the rock is smooth and shines. From month tomonth and year to year the wolves had ravened there, seeking to devourthe bones of him who sat above. Night upon night they had leaped thusagainst the wall of the cave, but never might their clashing jawsclose upon his foot. One foot they had, indeed, but the other theycould not come by.

　　"Now as I watched, filled with fear and wonder, the she-wolf, hertongue lolling from her jaws, made so mighty a bound that she almostreached the hanging foot, and yet not quite. She fell back, and then Isaw that the leap was her last for that time, for she had oversprungherself, and lay there howling, the black blood flowing from hermouth. The wolf saw also: he drew near, sniffed at her, then, knowingthat she was hurt, seized her by the throat and worried her. Now allthe place was filled with groans and choking howls, as the wolvesrolled over and over beneath him who sat above, and in the blood-redlight of the dying sun the sight and sounds were so horrid that Itrembled like a child. The she-wolf grew faint, for the fangs of hermate were buried in her throat. Then I saw that now was the time tosmite him, lest when he had killed her he should kill me also. So Ilifted the Watcher and sprang into the cave, having it in my mind toslay the wolf before he lifted up his head. But he heard my footsteps,or perhaps my shadow fell upon him. Loosing his grip, he looked up,this father of wolves; then, making no sound, he sprang straight at mythroat.

　　"I saw him, and whirling the Watcher aloft, I smote with all mystrength. The blow met him in mid-air; it fell full on his chest andstruck him backwards to the earth. But there he would not say, for,rising before I could smite again, once more he sprang at me. Thistime I leaped aside and struck downwards, and the blow fell upon hisright leg and broke it, so that he could spring no more. Yet he ran atme on three feet, and, though the club fell on his side, he seized mewith his teeth, biting through that leather bag, which was wound aboutmy middle, into the flesh behind. Then I yelled with pain and rage,and lifting the Watcher endways, drove it down with both hands, as aman drives a stake into the earth, and that with so great a strokethat the skull of the wolf was shattered like a pot, and he fell dead,dragging me with him. Presently I sat up on the ground, and, placingthe handle of the Watcher between his jaws, I forced them open,freeing my flesh from the grip of his teeth. Then I looked at mywounds; they were not deep, for the leather bag had saved me, yet Ifeel them to this hour, for there is poison in the mouth of a wolf.Presently I glanced up, and saw that the she-wolf had found her feetagain, and stood as though unhurt; for this is the nature of theseghosts, Umslopogaas, that, though they fight continually, they cannotdestroy each other. They may be killed by man alone, and that hardly.There she stood, and yet she did not look at me or on her dead mate,but at him who sat above. I saw, and crept softly behind her, then,lifting the Watcher, I dashed him down with all my strength. The blowfell on her neck and broke it, so that she rolled over and at once wasdead.

　　"Now I rested awhile, then went to the mouth of the cave and lookedout. The sun was sinking: all the depth of the forest was black, butthe light still shone on the face of the stone woman who sits foreveron the mountain. Here, then, I must bide this night, for, though themoon shone white and full in the sky, I dared not wend towards theplains alone with the wolves and the ghosts. And if I dared not goalone, how much less should I dare to go bearing with me him who satin the cleft of the rock! Nay, here I must bide, so I went out of thecave to the spring which flows from the rock on the right yonder andwashed my wounds and drank. Then I came back and sat in the mouth ofthe cave, and watched the light die away from the face of the world.While it was dying there was silence, but when it was dead the forestawoke. A wind sprang up and tossed it till the green of its boughswaved like troubled water on which the moon shines faintly. From theheart of it, too, came howlings of ghosts and wolves, that wereanswered by howls from the rocks above--hearken, Umslopogaas, suchhowlings as we hear to-night!

　　"It was awful here in the mouth of the cave, for I had not yet learnedthe secret of the stone, and if I had known it, should I have dared toclose it, leaving myself alone with the dead wolves and him whom thewolves had struggled to tear down? I walked out yonder on to theplatform and looked up. The moon shone full upon the face of the stoneWitch who sits aloft forever. She seemed to grin at me, and, oh! Igrew afraid, for now I knew that this was a place of dead men, a placewhere spirits perch like vultures in a tree, as they sweep round andround the world. I went back to the cave, and feeling that I must dosomething lest I should go mad, I drew to me the carcase of the greatdog-wolf which I had killed, and, taking my knife of iron, I began toskin it by the light of the moon. For an hour or more I skinned,singing to myself as I worked, and striving to forget him who sat inthe cleft above and the howlings which ran about the mountains. Butever the moonlight shone more clearly into the cave: now by it I couldsee his shape of bone and skin, ay, and even the bandage about hiseyes. Why had he tied it there? I wondered--perhaps to hide the facesof the fierce wolves as they sprang upwards to grip him. And alwaysthe howlings drew nearer; now I could see grey forms creeping to andfro in the shadows of the rocky place before me. Ah! there before meglared two red eyes: a sharp snout sniffed at the carcase which Iskinned. With a yell, I lifted the Watcher and smote. There came ascream of pain, and something galloped away into the shadows.

　　"Now the skin was off. I cast it behind me, and seizing the carcasedragged it to the edge of the rock and left it. Presently the sound ofhowlings drew near again, and I saw the grey shapes creep up one byone. Now they gathered round the carcase, now they fell upon it andrent it, fighting horribly till all was finished. Then, licking theirred chops, they slunk back to the forest.

　　"Did I sleep or did I wake? Nay, I cannot tell. But I know this, thatof a sudden I seemed to look up and see. I saw a light--perchance,Umslopogaas, it was the light of the moon, shining upon him that sataloft at the end of the cave. It was a red light, and he glowed in itas glows a thing that is rotten. I looked, or seemed to look, and thenI thought that the hanging jaw moved, and from it came a voice thatwas harsh and hollow as of one who speaks from an empty belly, througha withered throat.

　　"'Hail, Galazi, child of Siguyana!' said the voice, 'Galazi the Wolf!Say, what dost thou here in the Ghost Mountain, where the stone Witchsits forever, waiting for the world to die?'

　　"Then, Umslopogaas, I answered, or seemed to answer, and my voice,too, sounded strange and hollow:--

　　"'Hail, Dead One, who sittest like a vulture on a rock! I do this onthe Ghost Mountain. I come to seek thy bones and bear them to thymother for burial.'

　　"'Many and many a year have I sat aloft, Galazi,' answered the voice,'watching the ghost-wolves leap and leap to drag me down, till therock grew smooth beneath the wearing of their feet. So I sat sevendays and nights, being yet alive, the hungry wolves below, and hungergnawing at my heart. So I have sat many and many a year, being dead inthe heart of the old stone Witch, watching the moon and the sun andthe stars, hearkening to the howls of the ghost-wolves as they ravenedbeneath me, and learning the wisdom of the old witch who sits above ineverlasting stone. Yet my mother was young and fair when I trod thehaunted forest and climbed the knees of stone. How seems she now,Galazi?'

　　"'She is white and wrinkled and very aged,' I answered. 'They call hermad, yet at her bidding I came to seek thee, Dead One, bearing theWatcher that was thy father's and shall be mine.'

　　"'It shall be thine, Galazi,' said the voice, 'for thou alone hastdared the ghosts to me sleep and burial. Hearken, thine also shall bethe wisdom of the old witch who sits aloft forever, frozen intoeverlasting stone--thine and one other's. These are not wolves thatthou hast seen, that is no wolf which thou hast slain; nay, they areghosts--evil ghosts of men who lived in ages gone, and who must nowlive till they be slain by men. And knowest thou how they lived,Galazi, and what was the food they ate? When the light comes again,Galazi, climb to the breasts of the stone Witch, and look in the cleftwhich is between her breasts. There shalt thou see how these menlived. And now this doom is on them: they must wander gaunt and hungryin the shape of wolves, haunting that Ghost Mountain where they oncefed, till they are led forth to die at the hands of men. Because oftheir devouring hunger they have leapt from year to year, striving toreach my bones; and he whom thou hast slain was the king of them, andshe at his side was their queen.

　　"'Now, Galazi the Wolf, this is the wisdom that I give thee: thoushalt be king of the ghost-wolves, thou and another, whom a lion shallbring thee. Gird the black skin upon thy shoulders, and the wolvesshall follow thee; all the three hundred and sixty and three of themthat are left, and let him who shall be brought to thee gird on theskin of grey. Where ye twain lead them, there shall they raven,bringing you victory till all are dead. But know this, that there onlymay they raven where in life they ravened, seeking for their food.Yet, that was an ill gift thou tookest from my mother--the gift of theWatcher, for though without the Watcher thou hadst never slain theking of the ghost-wolves, yet, bearing the Watcher, thou shalt thyselfbe slain. Now, on the morrow carry me back to my mother, so that I maysleep where the ghost-wolves leap no more. I have spoken, Galazi.'

　　"Now the Dead One's voice seemed to grow ever fainter and more hollowas he spoke, till at the last I could scarcely hear his words, yet Ianswered him, asking him this:--

　　"'Who is it, then, that the lion shall bring to me to rule with meover the ghost-wolves, and how is he named?'

　　"Then the Dead One spoke once more very faintly, yet in the silence ofthe place I heard his words:--

　　"'He is named Umslopogaas the Slaughterer, son of Chaka, Lion of theZulu."

　　Now Umslopogaas started up from his place by the fire.

　　"I am named Umslopogaas," he said, "but the Slaughterer I am notnamed, and I am the son of Mopo, and not the son of Chaka, Lion of theZulu; you have dreamed a dream, Galazi, or, if it was no dream, thenthe Dead One lied to you."

　　"Perchance this was so, Umslopogaas," answered Galazi the Wolf."Perhaps I dreamed, of perhaps the Dead One lied; nevertheless, if helied in this matter, in other matters he did not lie, as you shallhear.

　　"After I had heard these words, or had dreamed that I heard them, Islept indeed, and when I woke the forest beneath was like the cloudsof mist, but the grey light glinted upon the face of her who sits instone above. Now I remembered the dream that I had dreamed, and Iwould see if it were all a dream. So I rose, and leaving the cave,found a place where I might climb up to the breasts and head of thestone Witch. I climbed, and as I went the rays of the sun lit upon herface, and I rejoiced to see them. But, when I drew near, the likenessto the face of a woman faded away, and I saw nothing before me butrugged heaps of piled-up rock. For this, Umslopogaas, is the way ofwitches, be they of stone or flesh--when you draw near to them theychange their shape.

　　"Now I was on the breast of the mountain, and wandered to and forawhile between the great heaps of stone. At length I found, as itwere, a crack in the stone thrice as wide as a man can jump, and inlength half a spear's throw, and near this crack stood great stonesblackened by fire, and beneath them broken pots and a knife of flint.I looked down into the crack--it was very deep, and green with moss,and tall ferns grew about in it, for the damp gathered there. Therewas nothing else. I had dreamed a lying dream. I turned to go, thenfound another mind, and climbed down into the cleft, pushing aside theferns. Beneath the ferns was moss; I scraped it away with the Watcher.Presently the iron of the club struck on something that was yellow andround like a stone, and from the yellow thing came a hollow sound. Ilifted it, Umslopogaas; it was the skull of a child.

　　"I dug deeper and scraped away more moss, till presently I saw.Beneath the moss was nothing but the bones of men--old bones that hadlain there many years; the little ones had rotted, the larger onesremained--some were yellow, some black, and others still white. Theywere not broken, as are those that hyenas and wolves have worried, yeton some of them I could see the marks of teeth. Then, Umslopogaas, Iwent back to the cave, never looking behind me.

　　"Now when I was come to the cave I did this: I skinned the she-wolfalso. When I had finished the sun was up, and I knew that it was timeto go. But I could not go alone--he who sat aloft in the cleft of thecave must go with me. I greatly feared to touch him--this Dead One,who had spoken to me in a dream; yet I must do it. So I brought stonesand piled them up till I could reach him; then I lifted him down, forhe was very light, being but skin and bones. When he was down, I boundthe hides of the wolves about me, then leaving the leather bag, intowhich he could not enter, I took the Dead One and placed him on myshoulders as a man might carry a child, for his legs were fixedsomewhat apart, and holding him by the foot which was left on him, Iset out for the kraal. Down the slope I went as swiftly as I could,for now I knew the way, seeing and hearing nothing, except once, whenthere came a rush of wings, and a great eagle swept down at that whichsat upon my shoulders. I shouted, and the eagle flew away, then Ientered the dark of the forest. Here I must walk softly, lest the headof him I carried should strike against the boughs and be smitten fromhim.

　　"For awhile I went on thus, till I drew near to the heart of theforest. Then I heard a wolf howl on my right, and from the left cameanswering howls, and these, again, were answered by others in front ofand behind me. I walked on boldly, for I dared not stay, guidingmyself by the sun, which from time to time shone down on me redlythrough the boughs of the great trees. Now I could see forms grey andblack slinking near my path, sniffing at the air as they went, and nowI came to a little open place, and, behold! all the wolves in theworld were gathered together there. My heart melted, my legs trembledbeneath me. On every side were the brutes, great and hungry. And Istood still, with club aloft, and slowly they crept up, muttering andgrowling as they came, till they formed a deep circle round me. Yetthey did not spring on me, only drew nearer and ever nearer. Presentlyone sprang, indeed, but not at me; he sprang at that which sat upon myshoulders. I moved aside, and he missed his aim, and, coming to theground again, stood there growling and whining like a beast afraid.Then I remembered the words of my dream, if dream it were, how thatthe Dead One had given me wisdom that I should be king of the ghost-wolves--I and another whom a lion should bear to me. Was it not so? Ifit was not so, how came it that the wolves did not devour me?

　　"For a moment I stood thinking, then I lifted up my voice and howledlike a wolf, and lo! Umslopogaas, all the wolves howled in answer witha mighty howling. I stretched out my hand and called to them. They ranto me, gathering round me as though to devour me. But they did notharm me; they licked my legs with their red tongues, and fighting tocome near me, pressed themselves against me as does a cat. One,indeed, snatched at him who sat on my shoulder, but I struck him withthe Watcher and he slunk back like a whipped hound; moreover, theothers bit him so that he yelled. Now I knew that I had no more tofear, for I was king of the ghost-wolves, so I walked on, and with mecame all the great pack of them. I walked on and on, and they trottedbeside me silently, and the fallen leaves crackled beneath their feet,and the dust rose up about them, till at length I reached the edge ofthe forest.

　　"Now I remembered that I must not be seen thus by men, lest theyshould think me a wizard and kill me. Therefore, at the edge of theforest I halted and made signs to the wolves to go back. At this theyhowled piteously, as though in grief, but I called to them that Iwould come again and be their king, and it seemed as though theirbrute hearts understood my words. Then they all went, still howling,till presently I was alone.

　　"And now, Umslopogaas, it is time to sleep; to-morrow night I will endmy tale."

　　CHAPTER XIV

　　THE WOLF-BRETHREN

　　Now, my father, on the morrow night, once again Umslopogaas and Galazithe wolf sat by the fire in the mouth of their cave, as we sit to-night, my father, and Galazi took up his tale.

　　"I passed on till I came to the river; it was still full, but thewater had run down a little, so that my feet found foothold. I wadedinto the river, using the Watcher as a staff, and the stream reachedto my elbows, but no higher. Now one on the farther bank of the riversaw that which sat upon my shoulders, and saw also the wolf's skin onmy head, and ran to the kraal crying, 'Here comes one who walks thewaters on the back of a wolf.'

　　"So it came about that when I drew towards the kraal all the people ofthe kraal were gathered together to meet me, except the old woman, whocould not walk so far. But when they saw me coming up the slope of thehill, and when they knew what it was that sat upon my shoulders, theywere smitten with fear. Yet they did not run, because of their greatwonder, only they walked backward before me, clinging each to each andsaying nothing. I too came on silently, till at length I reached thekraal, and before its gates sat the old woman basking in the sun ofthe afternoon. Presently she looked up and cried:--

　　"'What ails you, people of my house, that you walk backwards like menbewitched, and who is that tall and deathly man who comes toward you?'

　　"But still they drew on backward, saying no word, the little childrenclinging to the women, the women clinging to the men, till they hadpassed the old wife and ranged themselves behind her like a regimentof soldiers. Then they halted against the fence of the kraal. But Icame on to the old woman, and lifted him who sat upon my shoulders,and placed him on the ground before her, saying, 'Woman, here is yourson; I have snatched him with much toil from the jaws of the ghosts--and they are many up yonder--all save one foot, which I could notfind. Take him now and bury him, for I weary of his fellowship.'

　　"She looked upon that which sat before her. She put out her witheredhand and drew the bandage from his sunken eyes. Then she screamedaloud a shrill scream, and, flinging her arms about the neck of theDead One, she cried: 'It is my son whom I bore--my very son, whom fortwice ten years and half a ten I have not looked upon. Greeting, myson, greeting! Now shalt thou find burial, and I with three--ay, Iwith thee!'

　　"And once more she cried aloud, standing upon her feet with armsoutstretched. Then of a sudden foam burst from her lips, and she fellforward upon the body of her son, and was dead.

　　"Now silence came upon the place again, for all were fearful. At lastone cried: 'How is this man named who has won the body from theghosts?'

　　"'I am named Galazi,' I answered.

　　"'Nay,' said he. 'The Wolf you are named. Look at the wolf's red hideupon his head!'

　　"'I am named Galazi, and the Wolf you have named me,' I said again.'So be it: I am named Galazi the Wolf.'

　　"'Methinks he is a wolf,' said he. 'Look, now, at his teeth, how theygrin! This is no man, my brothers, but a wolf.'

　　"'No wolf and no man,' said another, 'but a wizard. None but a wizardcould have passed the forest and won the lap of her who sits in stoneforever.'

　　"'Yes, yes! he is a wolf--he is a wizard!' they screamed. 'Kill him!Kill the wolf-wizard before he brings the ghosts upon us!' And theyran towards me with uplifted spears.

　　"'I am a wolf indeed,' I cried, 'and I am a wizard indeed, and I willbring wolves and ghosts upon you ere all is done.' And I turned andfled so swiftly that soon they were left behind me. Now as I ran I meta girl; a basket of mealies was on her head, and she bore a dead kidin her hand. I rushed at her howling like a wolf, and I snatched themealies from her head and the kid from her hand. Then I fled on, andcoming to the river, I crossed it, and for that night I hid myself inthe rocks beyond, eating the mealies and the flesh of the kid.

　　"On the morrow at dawn I rose and shook the dew from the wolf-hide.Then I went on into the forest and howled like a wolf. They knew myvoice, the ghost-wolves, and howled in answer from far and near. ThenI heard the pattering of their feet, and they came round me by tensand by twenties, and fawned upon me. I counted their number; theynumbered three hundred and sixty and three.

　　"Afterwards, I went on to the cave, and I have lived there in thecave, Umslopogaas, for nigh upon twelve moons, and I have become awolf-man. For with the wolves I hunt and raven, and they know me, andwhat I bid them that they do. Stay, Umslopogaas, now you are strongagain, and, if your courage does not fail you, you shall see this verynight. Come now, have you the heart, Umslopogaas?"

　　Then Umslopogaas rose and laughed aloud. "I am young in years," hecried, "and scarcely come to the full strength of men; yet hitherto Ihave not turned my back on lion or witch, on wolf or man. Now let ussee this impi of yours--this impi black and grey, that runs on fourlegs with fangs for spears!"

　　"You must first bind on the she-wolf's hide, Umslopogaas," quothGalazi, "else, before a man could count his fingers twice there wouldbe little enough left of you. Bind it about the neck and beneath thearms, and see that the fastenings do not burst, lest it be the worsefor you."

　　So Umslopogaas took the grey wolf's hide and bound it on with thongsof leather, and its teeth gleamed upon his head, and he took a spearin his hand. Galazi also bound on the hide of the king of the wolves,and they went out on to the space before the cave. Galazi stood thereawhile, and the moonlight fell upon him, and Umslopogaas saw that hisface grew wild and beastlike, that his eyes shone, and his teethgrinned beneath his curling lips. He lifted up his head and howled outupon the night. Thrice Galazi lifted his head and thrice he howledloudly, and yet more loud. But before ever the echoes had died in theair, from the heights of the rocks above and the depths of the forestbeneath, there came howlings in answer. Nearer they grew and nearer;now there was a sound of feet, and a wolf, great and grey, boundedtowards them, and after him many another. They came to Galazi, theysprang upon him, fawning round him, but he beat them down with theWatcher. Then of a sudden they saw Umslopogaas, and rushed at himopen-mouthed.

　　"Stand and do not move!" cried Galazi. "Be not afraid!"

　　"I have always fondled dogs," answered Umslopogaas, "shall I learn tofear them now?"

　　Yet though he spoke boldly, in his heart he was afraid, for this wasthe most terrible of all sights. The wolves rushed on him open-mouthed, from before and from behind, so that in a breath he was well-nigh hidden by their forms. Yet no fang pierced him, for as they leaptthey smelt the smell of the skin upon him. Then Umslopogaas saw thatthe wolves leapt at him no more, but the she-wolves gathered round himwho wore the she-wolf's skin. They were great and gaunt and hungry,all were full-grown, there were no little ones, and their number wasso many that he could not count them in the moonlight. Umslopogaas,looking into their red eyes, felt his heart become as the heart of awolf, and he, too, lifted up his head and howled, and the she-wolveshowled in answer.

　　"The pack is gathered; now for the hunt!" cried Galazi. "Make yourfeet swift, my brother, for we shall journey far to-night. Ho,Blackfang! ho, Greysnout! Ho, my people black and grey, away! away!"

　　He spoke and bounded forward, and with him went Umslopogaas, and afterhim streamed the ghost-wolves. They fled down the mountain sides,leaping from boulder to boulder like bucks. Presently they stood by akloof that was thick with trees. Galazi stopped, holding up theWatcher, and the wolves stopped with him.

　　"I smell a quarry," he cried; "in, my people, in!"

　　Then the wolves plunged silently into the great kloof, but Galazi andUmslopogaas drew to the foot of it and waited. Presently there came asound of breaking boughs, and lo! before them stood a buffalo, a bullwho lowed fiercely and sniffed the air.

　　"This one will give us a good chase, my brother; see, he is gaunt andthin! Ah! that meat is tender which my people have hunted to thedeath!"

　　As Galazi spoke, the first of the wolves drew from the covert and sawthe buffalo; then, giving tongue, they sprang towards it. The bull sawalso, and dashed down the hill, and after him came Galazi andUmslopogaas, and with them all their company, and the rocks shook withthe music of their hunting. They rushed down the mountain side, and itcame into the heart of Umslopogaas, that he, too, was a wolf. Theyrushed madly, yet his feet were swift as the swiftest; no wolf couldoutstrip him, and in him was but one desire--the desire of prey. Nowthey neared the borders of the forest, and Galazi shouted. He shoutedto Greysnout and to Blackfang, to Blood and to Deathgrip, and thesefour leaped forward from the pack, running so swiftly that theirbellies seemed to touch the ground. They passed about the bull,turning him from the forest and setting his head up the slope of themountain. Then the chase wheeled, the bull leaped and bounded up themountain side, and on one flank lay Greysnout and Deathgrip and on theother lay Blood and Blackfang, while behind came the Wolf-Brethren,and after them the wolves with lolling tongues. Up the hill they sped,but the feet of Umslopogaas never wearied, his breath did not failhim. Once more they drew near the lap of the Grey Witch where the cavewas. On rushed the bull, mad with fear. He ran so swiftly that thewolves were left behind, since here for a space the ground was levelto his feet. Galazi looked on Umslopogaas at his side, and grinned.

　　"You do not run so ill, my brother, who have been sick of late. Seenow if you can outrun me! Who shall touch the quarry first?"

　　Now the bull was ahead by two spear-throws. Umslopogaas looked andgrinned back at Galazi. "Good!" he cried, "away!"

　　They sped forward with a bound, and for awhile it seemed toUmslopogaas as though they stood side by side, only the bull grewnearer and nearer. Then he put out his strength and the swiftness ofhis feet, and lo! when he looked again he was alone, and the bull wasvery near. Never were feet so swift as those of Umslopogaas. Now hereached the bull as he laboured on. Umslopogaas placed his hands uponthe back of the bull and leaped; he was on him, he sat him as youwhite men sit a horse. Then he lifted the spear in his hand, and droveit down between the shoulders to the spine, and of a sudden the greatbuffalo staggered, stopped, and fell dead.

　　Galazi came up. "Who now is the swiftest, Galazi?" cried Umslopogaas,"I, or you, or your wolf host?"

　　"You are the swiftest, Umslopogaas," said Galazi, gasping for hisbreath. "Never did a man run as you run, nor ever shall again."

　　Now the wolves streamed up, and would have torn the carcase, butGalazi beat them back, and they rested awhile. Then Galazi said, "Letus cut meat from the bull with a spear."

　　So they cut meat from the bull, and when they had finished Galazimotioned to the wolves, and they fell upon the carcase, fightingfuriously. In a little while nothing was left except the larger bones,and yet each wolf had but a little.

　　Then they went back to the cave and slept.

　　Afterwards Umslopogaas told Galazi all his tale, and Galazi asked himif he would abide with him and be his brother, and rule with him overthe wolf-kind, or seek his father Mopo at the kraal of Chaka.

　　Umslopogaas said that it was rather in his mind to seek his sisterNada, for he was weary of the kraal of Chaka, but he thought of Nadaday and night.

　　"Where, then, is Nada, your sister?" asked Galazi.

　　"She sleeps in the caves of your people, Galazi; she tarries with theHalakazi."

　　"Stay awhile, Umslopogaas," cried Galazi; "stay till we are menindeed. Then we will seek this sister of yours and snatch her from thecaves of the Halakazi."

　　Now the desire of this wolf-life had entered into the heart ofUmslopogaas, and he said that it should be so, and on the morrow theymade them blood-brethren, to be one till death, before all the companyof ghost-wolves, and the wolves howled when they smelt the blood ofmen. In all things thenceforth these two were equal, and the ghost-wolves hearkened to the voice of both of them. And on many a moonlightnight they and the wolves hunted together, winning their food. Attimes they crossed the river, hunting in the plains, for game wasscarce on the mountain, and the people of the kraal would come out,hearing the mighty howling, and watch the pack sweep across the veldt,and with them a man or men. Then they would say that the ghosts wereabroad and creep into their huts shivering with fear. But as yet theWolf-Brethren and their pack killed no men, but game only, or, attimes, elephants and lions.

　　Now when Umslopogaas had abode some moons in the Watch Mountain, on anight he dreamed of Nada, and awakening soft at heart, bethoughthimself that he would learn tidings concerning me, his father, Mopo,and what had befallen me and her whom he deemed his mother, and Nada,his sister, and his other brethren. So he clothed himself, hiding hisnakedness, and, leaving Galazi, descended to that kraal where the oldwoman had dwelt, and there gave it out that he was a young man, achief's son from a far place, who sought a wife. The people of thekraal listened to him, though they held that his look was fierce andwild, and one asked if this were Galazi the Wolf, Galazi the Wizard.But another answered that this was not Galazi, for their eyes had seenhim. Umslopogaas said that he knew nothing of Galazi, and little ofwolves, and lo! while he spoke there came an impi of fifty men andentered the kraal. Umslopogaas looked at the leaders of the impi andknew them for captains of Chaka. At first he would have spoken tothem, but his Ehlose bade him hold his peace. So he sat in a corner ofthe big hut and listened. Presently the headman of the kraal, whotrembled with fear, for he believed that the impi had been sent todestroy him and all that were his, asked the captain what was hiswill.

　　"A little matter, and a vain," said the captain. "We are sent by theking to search for a certain youth, Umslopogaas, the son of Mopo, theking's doctor. Mopo gave it out that the youth was killed by a lionnear these mountains, and Chaka would learn if this is true."

　　"We know nothing of the youth," said the headman. "But what would yewith him?"

　　"Only this," answered the captain, "to kill him."

　　"That is yet to do," thought Umslopogaas.

　　"Who is this Mopo?" asked the headman.

　　"An evildoer, whose house the king has eaten up--man, woman, andchild," answered the captain.

　　CHAPTER XV

　　THE DEATH OF THE KING'S SLAYERS

　　When Umslopogaas heard these words his heart was heavy, and a greatanger burned in his breast, for he thought that I, Mopo, was dead withthe rest of his house, and he loved me. But he said nothing; only,watching till none were looking, he slipped past the backs of thecaptains and won the door of the hut. Soon he was clear of the kraal,and, running swiftly, crossed the river and came to the GhostMountain. Meanwhile, the captain asked the headman of the kraal if heknew anything of such a youth as him for whom they sought. The headmantold the captain of Galazi the Wolf, but the captain said that thiscould not be the lad, for Galazi had dwelt many moons upon the GhostMountain.

　　"There is another youth," said the headman; "a stranger, fierce,strong and tall, with eyes that shine like spears. He is in the hutnow; he sits yonder in the shadow."

　　The captain rose and looked into the shadow, but Umslopogaas was gone.

　　"Now this youth is fled," said the headman, "and yet none saw him fly!Perhaps he also is a wizard! Indeed, I have heard that now there aretwo of them upon the Ghost Mountain, and that they hunt there at nightwith the ghost-wolves, but I do not know if it is true."

　　"Now I am minded to kill you," said the captain in wrath, "because youhave suffered this youth to escape me. Without doubt it isUmslopogaas, son of Mopo."

　　"It is no fault of mine," said the headmen. "These young men arewizards, who can pass hither and thither at will. But I say this toyou, captain of the king, if you will go on the Ghost Mountain, youmust go there alone with your soldiers, for none in these parts dareto tread upon that mountain."

　　"Yet I shall dare to-morrow," said the captain. "We grow brave at thekraal of Chaka. There men do not fear spears or ghosts or wild beastsor magic, but they fear the king's word alone. The sun sets--give usfood. To-morrow we will search the mountain."

　　Thus, my father, did this captain speak in his folly,--he who shouldnever see another sun.

　　Now Umslopogaas reached the mountain, and when he had passed theforest--of which he had learned every secret way--the darknessgathered, and the wolves awoke in the darkness and drew near howling.Umslopogaas howled in answer, and presently that great wolf Deathgripcame to him. Umslopogaas saw him and called him by his name; but,behold! the brute did not know him, and flew at him, growling. ThenUmslopogaas remembered that the she-wolf's skin was not bound abouthis shoulders, and therefore it was that the wolf Deathgrip knew himnot. For though in the daytime, when the wolves slept, he might passto and fro without the skin, at night it was not so. He had notbrought the skin, because he dared not wear it in the sight of the menof the kraal, lest they should know him for one of the Wolf-Brethren,and it had not been his plan to seek the mountain again that night,but rather on the morrow. Now Umslopogaas knew that his danger wasgreat indeed. He beat back Deathgrip with his kerrie, but others werebehind him, for the wolves gathered fast. Then he bounded away towardsthe cave, for he was so swift of foot that the wolves could not catchhim, though they pressed him hard, and once the teeth of one of themtore his moocha. Never before did he run so fast, and in the end hereached the cave and rolled the rock to, and as he did so the wolvesdashed themselves against it. Then he clad himself in the hide of theshe-wolf, and, pushing aside the stone, came out. And, lo! the eyes ofthe wolves were opened, and they knew him for one of the brethren whoruled over them, and slunk away at his bidding.

　　Now Umslopogaas sat himself down at the mouth of the cave waiting forGalazi, and he thought. Presently Galazi came, and in few wordsUmslopogaas told him all his tale.

　　"You have run a great risk, my brother," said Galazi. "What now?"

　　"This," said Umslopogaas: "these people of ours are hungry for theflesh of men; let us feed them full on the soldiers of Chaka, who sityonder at the kraal seeking my life. I would take vengeance for Mopo,my father, and all my brethren who are dead, and for my mothers, thewives of Mopo. What say you?"

　　Galazi laughed aloud. "That will be merry, my brother," he said. "Iweary of hunting beasts, let us hunt men to-night."

　　"Ay, to-night," said Umslopogaas, nodding. "I long to look upon thatcaptain as a maid longs for her lover's kiss. But first let us restand eat, for the night is young; then, Galazi, summon our impi."

　　So they rested and ate, and afterwards went out armed, and Galazihowled to the wolves, and they came in tens and twenties till all weregathered together. Galazi moved among them, shaking the Watcher, asthey sat upon their haunches, and followed him with their fiery eyes.

　　"We do not hunt game to-night, little people," he cried, "but men, andyou love the flesh of men."

　　Now all the wolves howled as though they understood. Then the packdivided itself as was its custom, the she-wolves followingUmslopogaas, the dog-wolves following Galazi, and in silence theymoved swiftly down towards the plain. They came to the river and swamit, and there, eight spear throws away, on the farther side of theriver stood the kraal. Now the Wolf-Brethren took counsel together,and Galazi, with the dog-wolves, went to the north gate, andUmslopogaas with the she-wolves to the south gate. They reached themsafely and in silence, for at the bidding of the brethren the wolvesceased from their howlings. The gates were stopped with thorns, butthe brethren pulled out the thorns and made a passage. As they didthis it chanced that certain dogs in the kraal heard the sound of thestirred boughs, and awakening, caught the smell of the wolves thatwere with Umslopogaas, for the wind blew from that quarter. These dogsran out barking, and presently they came to the south gate of thekraal, and flew at Umslopogaas, who pulled away the thorns. Now whenthe wolves saw the dogs they could be restrained no longer, but sprangon them and tore them to fragments, and the sound of their worryingcame to the ears of the soldiers of Chaka and of the dwellers in thekraal, so that they sprang from sleep, snatching their arms. And asthey came out of the huts they saw in the moonlight a man wearing awolf's hide rushing across the empty cattle kraal, for the grass waslong and the cattle were out at graze, and with him countless wolves,black and grey. Then they cried aloud in terror, saying that theghosts were on them, and turned to flee to the north gate of thekraal. But, behold! here also they met a man clad in a wolf's skinonly, and with him countless wolves, black and grey.

　　Now, some flung themselves to earth screaming in their fear, and somestrove to run away, but the greater part of the soldiers, and withthem many of the men of the kraal, came together in knots, beingminded to die like men at teeth of the ghosts, and that though theyshook with fear. Then Umslopogaas howled aloud, and howled Galazi, andthey flung themselves upon the soldiers and the people of the kraal,and with them came the wolves. Then a crying and a baying rose up toheaven as the grey wolves leaped and bit and tore. Little they heededthe spears and kerries of the soldiers. Some were killed, but the restdid not stay. Presently the knots of men broke up, and to each manwolves hung by twos and threes, dragging him to earth. Some few fled,indeed, but the wolves hunted them by gaze and scent, and pulled themdown before they passed the gates of the kraal.

　　The Wolf-Brethren also ravened with the rest. Busy was the Watcher,and many bowed beneath him, and often the spear of Umslopogaas flashedin the moonlight. It was finished; none were left living in thatkraal, and the wolves growled sullenly as they took their fill, theywho had been hungry for many days. Now the brethren met, and laughedin their wolf joy, because they had slaughtered those who were sentout to slaughter. They called to the wolves, bidding them search thehuts, and the wolves entered the huts as dogs enter a thicket, andkilled those who lurked there, or drove them forth to be slainwithout. Presently a man, great and tall, sprang from the last of thehuts, where he had hidden himself, and the wolves outside rushed onhim to drag him down. But Umslopogaas beat them back, for he had seenthe face of the man: it was that captain whom Chaka had sent out tokill him. He beat them back, and stalked up to the captain, saying:"Greeting to you, captain of the king! Now tell us what is your errandhere, beneath the shadow of her who sits in stone?" And he pointedwith his spear to the Grey Witch on the Ghost Mountain, on which themoon shone bright.

　　Now the captain had a great heart, though he had hidden from thewolves, and answered boldly:--

　　"What is that to you, wizard? Your ghost wolves had made an end of myerrand. Let them make an end of me also."

　　"Be not in haste, captain," said Umslopogaas. "Say, did you not seek acertain youth, the son of Mopo?"

　　"That is so," answered the captain. "I sought one youth, and I havefound many evil spirits." And he looked at the wolves tearing theirprey, and shuddered.

　　"Say, captain," quoth Umslopogaas, drawing back his hood of wolf'shide so that the moonlight fell upon his face, "is this the face ofthat youth whom you sought?"

　　"It is the face," answered the captain, astonished.

　　"Ay," laughed Umslopogaas, "it is the face. Fool! I knew your errandand heard your words, and thus have I answered them." And he pointedto the dead. "Now choose, and swiftly. Will you run for your lifeagainst my wolves? Will you do battle for your life against thesefour?" And he pointed to Greysnout and to Blackfang, to Blood and toDeathgrip, who watched him with slavering lips; "or will you standface to face with me, and if I am slain, with him who bears the club,and with whom I rule this people black and grey?"

　　"I fear ghosts, but of men I have no fear, though they be wizards,"answered the captain.

　　"Good!" cried Umslopogaas, shaking his spear.

　　Then they rushed together, and that fray was fierce. For presently thespear of Umslopogaas was broken in the shield of the captain and hewas left weaponless. Now Umslopogaas turned and fled swiftly, boundingover the dead and the wolves who preyed upon them, and the captainfollowed with uplifted spear, and mocked him as he came. Galazi alsowondered that Umslopogaas should fly from a single man. Hither andthither fled Umslopogaas, and always his eyes were on the earth. Of asudden, Galazi, who watched, saw him sweep forward like a bird andstoop to the ground. Then he wheeled round, and lo! there was an axein his hand. The captain rushed at him, and Umslopogaas smote as herushed, and the blade of the great spear that was lifted to pierce himfell to the ground hewn from its haft. Again Umslopogaas smote: themoon-shaped axe sank through the stout shield deep into the breastbeyond. Then the captain threw up his arms and fell to the earth.

　　"Ah!" cried Umslopogaas, "you sought a youth to slay him, and havefound an axe to be slain by it! Sleep softly, captain of Chaka."

　　Then Umslopogaas spoke to Galazi, saying: "My brother, I will fight nomore with the spear, but with the axe alone; it was to seek an axethat I ran to and fro like a coward. But this is a poor thing! See,the haft is split because of the greatness of my stroke! Now this ismy desire--to win that great axe of Jikiza, which is called Groan-Maker, of which we have heard tell, so that axe and club may standtogether in the fray."

　　"That must be for another night," said Galazi. "We have not done soill for once. Now let us search for pots and corn, of which we standin need, and then to the mountain before dawn finds us."

　　Thus, then, did the Wolf-Brethren bring death on the impi of Chaka,and this was but the first of many deaths that they wrought with thehelp of the wolves. For ever they ravened through the land at night,and, falling on those they hated, they ate them up, till their nameand the name of the ghost-wolves became terrible in the ears of men,and the land was swept clean. But they found that the wolves would notgo abroad to worry everywhere. Thus, on a certain night, they set outto fall upon the kraals of the People of the Axe, where dwelt thechief Jikiza, who was named the Unconquered, and owned the axe Groan-Maker, but when they neared the kraal the wolves turned back and fled.Then Galazi remembered the dream that he had dreamed, in which theDead One in the cave had seemed to speak, telling him that there onlywhere the men-eaters had hunted in the past might the wolves hunt to-day. So they returned home, but Umslopogaas set himself to find a planto win the axe.

　　CHAPTER XVI

　　UMSLOPOGAAS VENTURES OUT TO WIN THE AXE

　　Now many moons had gone by since Umslopogaas became a king of thewolves, and he was a man full grown, a man fierce and tall and keen; aslayer of men, fleet of foot and of valour unequalled, seeing by nightas well as by day. But he was not yet named the Slaughterer, and notyet did he hold that iron chieftainess, the axe Groan-Maker. Still,the desire to win the axe was foremost in his mind, for no woman hadentered there, who when she enters drives out all other desire--ay, myfather, even that of good weapons. At times, indeed, Umslopogaas wouldlurk in the reeds by the river looking at the kraal of Jikiza theUnconquered, and would watch the gates of his kraal, and once as helurked he saw a man great, broad and hairy, who bore upon his shouldera shining axe, hafted with the horn of a rhinoceros. After that hisgreed for this axe entered into Umslopogaas more and more, till atlength he scarcely could sleep for thinking of it, and to Galazi hespoke of little else, wearying him much with his talk, for Galaziloved silence. But for all his longing he could find no means to winit.

　　Now it befell that as Umslopogaas hid one evening in the reeds,watching the kraal of Jikiza, he saw a maiden straight and fair, whoseskin shone like the copper anklets on her limbs. She walked slowlytowards the reeds where he lay hidden. Nor did she top at the brink ofthe reeds; she entered them and sat herself down within a spear'slength of where Umslopogaas was seated, and at once began to weep,speaking to herself as she wept.

　　"Would that the ghost-wolves might fall on him and all that is his,"she sobbed, "ay, and on Masilo also! I would hound them on, even if Imyself must next know their fangs. Better to die by the teeth of thewolves than to be sold to this fat pig of a Masilo. Oh! if I must wedhim, I will give him a knife for the bride's kiss. Oh! that I were alady of the ghost-wolves, there should be a picking of bones in thekraal of Jikiza before the moon grows young again."

　　Umslopogaas heard, and of a sudden reared himself up before the maid,and he was great and wild to look on, and the she-wolf's fangs shoneupon his brow.

　　"The ghost-wolves are at hand, damsel," he said. "They are ever athand for those who need them."

　　Now the maid saw him and screamed faintly, then grew silent, wonderingat the greatness and the fierce eyes of the man who spoke to her.

　　"Who are you?" she asked. "I fear you not, whoever you are."

　　"There you are wrong, damsel, for all men fear me, and they have causeto fear. I am one of the Wolf-Brethren, whose names have been told of;I am a wizard of the Ghost Mountain. Take heed, now, lest I kill you.It will be of little avail to call upon your people, for my feet arefleeter than theirs."

　　"I have no wish to call upon my people, Wolf-Man," she answered. "Andfor the rest, I am too young to kill."

　　"That is so, maiden," answered Umslopogaas, looking at her beauty."What were the words upon your lips as to Jikiza and a certain Masilo?Were they not fierce words, such as my heart likes well?"

　　"It seems that you heard them," answered the girl. "What need to wastebreath in speaking them again?"

　　"No need, maiden. Now tell me your story; perhaps I may find a way tohelp you."

　　"There is little to tell," she answered. "It is a small tale and acommon. My name is Zinita, and Jikiza the Unconquered is my step-father. He married my mother, who is dead, but none of his blood is inme. Now he would give me in marriage to a certain Masilo, a fat manand an old, whom I hate, because Masilo offers many cattle for me."

　　"Is there, then, another whom you would wed, maiden?" askedUmslopogaas.

　　"There is none," answered Zinita, looking him in the eyes.

　　"And is there no path by which you may escape from Masilo?"

　　"There is only one path, Wolf-Man--by death. If I die, I shall escape;if Masilo dies, I shall escape; but to little end, for I shall begiven to another; but if Jikiza dies, then it will be well. What ofthat wolf-people of yours, are they not hungry, Wolf-Man?"

　　"I cannot bring them here," answered Umslopogaas. "Is there no otherway?"

　　"There is another way," said Zinita, "if one can be found to try it."And again she looked at him strangely, causing the blood to beatwithin him. "Hearken! do you not know how our people are governed?They are governed by him who holds the axe Groan-Maker. He that canwin the axe in war from the hand of him who holds it, shall be ourchief. But if he who holds the axe dies unconquered, then his sontakes his place and with it the axe. It has been thus, indeed, forfour generations, since he who held Groan-Maker has always beenunconquerable. But I have heard that the great-grandfather of Jikizawon the axe from him who held it in his day; he won it by fraud. Forwhen the axe had fallen on him but lightly, he fell over, feigningdeath. Then the owner of the axe laughed, and turned to walk away. Butthe forefather of Jikiza sprang up behind him and pierced him throughwith a spear, and thus he became chief of the People of the Axe.Therefore, it is the custom of Jikiza to hew off the heads of thosewhom he kills with the axe."

　　"Does he, then, slay many?" asked Umslopogaas.

　　"Of late years, few indeed," she said, "for none dare stand againsthim--no, not with all to win. For, holding the axe Groan-Maker, he isunconquerable, and to fight with him is sure death. Fifty-and-one havetried in all, and before the hut of Jikiza there are piled fifty-and-one white skulls. And know this, the axe must be won in fight; if itis stolen or found, it has no virtue--nay, it brings shame and deathto him who holds it."

　　"How, then, may a man give battle to Jikiza?" he asked again.

　　"Thus: Once in every year, on the first day of the new moon of thesummer season, Jikiza holds a meeting of the headmen. Then he mustrise and challenge all or any to come forward and do battle with himto win the axe and become chief in his place. Now if one comesforward, they go into the cattle kraal, and there the matter is ended.Afterwards, when the head is hewn from his foe, Jikiza goes back tothe meeting of the headmen, and they talk as before. All are free tocome to the meeting, and Jikiza must fight with them if they wish it,whoever they be."

　　"Perhaps I shall be there," said Umslopogaas.

　　"After this meeting at the new moon, I am to be given in marriage toMasilo," said the maid. "But should one conquer Jikiza, then he willbe chief, and can give me in marriage to whom he will."

　　Now Umslopogaas understood her meaning, and knew that he had foundfavour in her sight; and the thought moved him a little, for womenwere strange to him as yet.

　　"If perchance I should be there," he said, "and if perchance I shouldwin the iron chieftainess, the axe Groan-Maker, and rule over thePeople of the Axe, you should not live far from the shadow of the axethenceforward, maid Zinita."

　　"It is well, Wolf-Man, though some might not wish to dwell in thatshadow; but first you must win the axe. Many have tried, and all havefailed."

　　"Yet one must succeed at last," he said, "and so, farewell!" and heleaped into the torrent of the river, and swam it with great strokes.

　　Now the maid Zinita watched him till he was gone, and love of himentered into her heart--a love that was fierce and jealous and strong.But as he wended to the Ghost Mountain Umslopogaas thought rather ofaxe Groan-Maker than of Maid Zinita; for ever, at the bottom,Umslopogaas loved war more than women, though this has been his fate,that women have brought sorrow on his head.

　　Fifteen days must pass before the day of the new moon, and during thistime Umslopogaas thought much and said little. Still, he told Galazisomething of the tale, and that he was determined to do battle withJikiza the Unconquered for the axe Groan-Maker. Galazi said that hewould do well to let it be, and that it was better to stay with thewolves than to go out seeking strange weapons. He said also that evenif he won the axe, the matter might not stay there, for he must takethe girl also, and his heart boded no good of women. It had been agirl who poisoned his father in the kraals of the Halakazi. To all ofwhich Umslopogaas answered nothing, for his heart was set both on theaxe and the girl, but more on the first than the last.

　　So the time wore on, and at length came the day of the new moon. Atthe dawn of that day Umslopogaas arose and clad himself in a moocha,binding the she-wolf's skin round his middle beneath the moocha. Inhis hand he took a stout fighting-shield, which he had made of buffalohide, and that same light moon-shaped axe with which he had slain thecaptain of Chaka.

　　"A poor weapon with which to kill Jikiza the Unconquerable," saidGalazi, eyeing it askance.

　　"It shall serve my turn," answered Umslopogaas.

　　Now Umslopogaas ate, and then they moved together slowly down themountain and crossed the river by a ford, for he wished to save hisstrength. On the farther side of the river Galazi hid himself in thereeds, because his face was known, and there Umslopogaas bade himfarewell, not knowing if he should look upon him again. Afterwards hewalked up to the Great Place of Jikiza. Now when he reached the gatesof the kraal, he saw that many people were streaming through them, andmingled with the people. Presently they came to the open space infront of the huts of Jikiza, and there the headmen were gatheredtogether. In the centre of them, and before a heap of the skulls ofmen which were piled up against his doorposts, sat Jikiza, a huge man,a hairy and a proud, who glared about him rolling his eyes. Fastenedto his arm by a thong of leather was the great axe Groan-Maker, andeach man as he came up saluted the axe, calling it "Inkosikaas," orchieftainess, but he did not salute Jikiza. Umslopogaas sat down withthe people in front of the councillors, and few took any notice ofhim, except Zinita, who moved sullenly to and fro bearing gourds ofbeer to the councillors. Near to Jikiza, on his right hand, sat a fatman with small and twinkling eyes, who watched the maid Zinitagreedily.

　　"Yon man," thought Umslopogaas, "is Masilo. The better for blood-letting will you be, Masilo."

　　Presently Jikiza spoke, rolling his eyes: "This is the matter beforeyou, councillors. I have settled it in my mind to give my step-daughter Zinita in marriage to Masilo, but the marriage gift is notyet agreed on. I demand a hundred head of cattle from Masilo, for themaid is fair and straight, a proper maid, and, moreover, my daughter,though not of my blood. But Masilo offers fifty head only, therefore Iask you to settle it."

　　"We hear you, Lord of the Axe," answered one of the councillors, "butfirst, O Unconquered, you must on this day of the year, according toancient custom, give public challenge to any man to fight you for theGroan-Maker and for your place as chief of the People of the Axe."

　　"This is a wearisome thing," grumbled Jikiza. "Can I never have donein it? Fifty-and-three have I slain in my youth without a wound, andnow for many years I have challenged, like a cock on a dunghill, andnone crow in answer."

　　"Ho, now! Is there any man who will come forward and do battle withme, Jikiza, for the great axe Groan-Maker? To him who can win it, itshall be, and with it the chieftainship of the People of the Axe."

　　Thus he spoke very fast, as a man gabbles a prayer to a spirit in whomhe has little faith, then turned once more to talk of the cattle ofMasilo and of the maid Zinita. But suddenly Umslopogaas stood up,looking at him over the top of his war shield, and crying, "Here isone, O Jikiza, who will do battle with you for the axe Groan-Maker andfor the chieftainship that is to him who holds the axe."

　　Now, all the people laughed, and Jikiza glared at him.

　　"Come forth from behind that big shield of yours," he said. "Come outand tell me your name and lineage--you who would do battle with theUnconquered for the ancient axe."

　　Then Umslopogaas came forward, and he looked so fierce, though he wasbut young, that the people laughed no more.

　　"What is my name and lineage to you, Jikiza?" he said. "Let it be, andhasten to do me battle, as you must by the custom, for I am eager tohandle the Groan-Maker and to sit in your seat and settle this matterof the cattle of Masilo the Pig. When I have killed you I will take aname who now have none."

　　Now once more the people laughed, but Jikiza grew mad with wrath, andsprang up gasping.

　　"What!" he said, "you dare to speak thus to me, you babe unweaned, tome the Unconquered, the holder of the axe! Never did I think to liveto hear such talk from a long-legged pup. On to the cattle kraal, tothe cattle kraal, People of the Axe, that I may hew this braggart'shead from his shoulders. He would stand in my place, would he?--theplace that I and my fathers have held for four generations by virtueof the axe. I tell you all, that presently I will stand upon his head,and then we will settle the matter of Masilo."

　　"Babble not so fast, man," quoth Umslopogaas, "or if you must babble,speak those words which you would say ere you bid the sun farewell."

　　Now, Jikiza choked with rage, and foam came from his lips so that hecould not speak, but the people found this sport--all except Masilo,who looked askance at the stranger, tall and fierce, and Zinita, wholooked at Masilo, and with no love. So they moved down to the cattlekraal, and Galazi, seeing it from afar, could keep away no longer, butdrew near and mingled with the crowd.

　　CHAPTER XVII

　　UMSLOPOGAAS BECOMES CHIEF OF THE PEOPLE OF THE AXE

　　Now, when Umslopogaas and Jikiza the Unconquered had come to thecattle kraal, they were set in its centre and there were ten pacesbetween them. Umslopogaas was armed with the great shield and thelight moon-shaped axe, Jikiza carried the Groan-Maker and a smalldancing shield, and, looking at the weapons of the two, people thoughtthat the stranger would furnish no sport to the holder of the axe.

　　"He is ill-armed," said an old man, "it should be otherwise--largeaxe, small shield. Jikiza is unconquerable, and the big shield willnot help this long-legged stranger when Groan-Maker rattles on thebuffalo hide." The old man spoke thus in the hearing of Galazi theWolf, and Galazi thought that he spoke wisely, and sorrowed for thefate of his brother.

　　Now, the word was given, and Jikiza rushed on Umslopogaas, roaring,for his rage was great. But Umslopogaas did not stir till his foe wasabout to strike, then suddenly he leaped aside, and as Jikiza passedhe smote him hard upon the back with the flat of his axe, making agreat sound, for it was not his plan to try and kill Jikiza with thisaxe. Now, a shout of laughter went up from the hundreds of the people,and the laughter went up from the hundreds of the people, and theheart of Jikiza nearly burst with rage because of the shame of thatblow. Round he came like a bull that is mad, and once more rushed atUmslopogaas, who lifted his shield to meet him. Then, of a sudden,just when the great axe leapt on high, Umslopogaas uttered a cry as offear, and, turning, fled before the face of Jikiza. Now once more theshout of laughter went up, while Umslopogaas fled swiftly, and afterhim rushed Jikiza, blind with fury. Round and about the kraal spedUmslopogaas, scarcely a spear's length ahead of Jikiza, and he rankeeping his back to the sun as much as might be, that he might watchthe shadow of Jikiza. A second time he sped round, while the peoplecheered the chase as hunters cheer a dog which pursues a buck. Socunningly did Umslopogaas run, that, though he seemed to reel withweakness in such fashion that men thought his breath was gone, yet hewent ever faster and faster, drawing Jikiza after him.

　　Now, when Umslopogaas knew by the breathing of his foe and by thestaggering of his shadow that his strength was spent, suddenly he madeas though he were about to fall himself, and stumbled out of the pathfar to the right, and as he stumbled he let drop his great shield fullin the way of Jikiza's feet. Then it came about that Jikiza, rushingon blindly, caught his feet in the shield and fell headlong to earth.Umslopogaas saw, and swooped on him like an eagle to a dove. Beforemen could so much as think, he had seized the axe Groan-Maker, andwith a blow of the steel he held had severed the thong of leatherwhich bound it to the wrist of Jikiza, and sprung back, holding thegreat axe aloft, and casting down his own weapon upon the ground. Now,the watchers saw all the cunning of his fight, and those of them whohated Jikiza shouted aloud. But others were silent.

　　Slowly Jikiza gathered himself from the ground, wondering if he werestill alive, and as he rose he grasped the little axe of Umslopogaas,and, looking at it, he wept. But Umslopogaas held up the great Groan-Maker, the iron chieftainess, and examined its curved points of bluesteel, the gouge that stands behind it, and the beauty of its haft,bound about with wire of brass, and ending in a knob like the knob ofa stick, as a lover looks upon the beauty of his bride. Then beforeall men he kissed the broad blade and cried aloud:--

　　"Greeting to thee, my Chieftainess, greeting to thee, Wife of myyouth, whom I have won in war. Never shall we part, thou and I, andtogether will we die, thou and I, for I am not minded that othersshould handle thee when I am gone."

　　Thus he cried in the hearing of men, then turned to Jikiza, who stoodweeping, because he had lost all.

　　"Where now is your pride, O Unconquered?" laughed Umslopogaas. "Fighton. You are as well armed as I was a while ago, when I did not fear tostand before you."

　　Jikiza looked at him for a moment, then with a curse he hurled thelittle axe at him, and, turning, fled swiftly towards the gates of thecattle kraal.

　　Umslopogaas stooped, and the little axe sped over him. Then he stoodfor a while watching, and the people thought that he meant to letJikiza go. But that was not his desire; he waited, indeed, untilJikiza had covered nearly half the space between him and the gate,then with a roar he leaped forward, as light leaps from a cloud, andso fast did his feet fly that the watchers could scarce see them move.Jikiza fled fast also, yet he seemed but as one who stands still. Nowhe reached the gate of the kraal, now there was rush, a light ofdownward falling steel, and something swept past him. Then, behold!Jikiza fell in the gateway of the cattle kraal, and all saw that hewas dead, smitten to death by that mighty axe Groan-Maker, which heand his fathers had held for many years.

　　A great shout went up from the crowd of watchers when they knew thatJikiza the Unconquered was killed at last, and there were many whohailed Umslopogaas, naming him Chief and Lord of the People of theAxe. But the sons of Jikiza to the number of ten, great men and brave,rushed on Umslopogaas to kill him. Umslopogaas ran backwards, liftingup the Groan-Maker, when certain councillors of the people flungthemselves in between them, crying, "Hold!"

　　"Is not this your law, ye councillors," said Umslopogaas, "that,having conquered the chief of the People of the Axe, I myself amchief?"

　　"That is our law indeed, stranger," answered an aged councillor, "butthis also is our law: that now you must do battle, one by one, withall who come against you. So it was in my father's time, when thegrandfather of him who now lies dead won the axe, and so it must beagain to-day."

　　"I have nothing to say against the rule," said Umslopogaas. "Now whois there who will come up against me to do battle for the axe Groan-Maker and the chieftainship of the People of the Axe?"

　　Then all the ten sons of Jikiza stepped forward as one man, for theirhearts were made with wrath because of the death of their father andbecause the chieftainship had gone from their race, so that in truththey cared little if they lived or died. But there were none besidesthese, for all men feared to stand before Umslopogaas and the Groan-Maker.

　　Umslopogaas counted them. "There are ten, by the head of Chaka!" hecried. "Now if I must fight all these one by one, no time will be leftto me this day to talk of the matter of Masilo and of the maid Zinita.Hearken! What say you, sons of Jikiza the Conquered? If I find oneother to stand beside me in the fray, and all of you come on at onceagainst us twain, ten against two, to slay us or be slain, will thatbe to your minds?"

　　The brethren consulted together, and held that so they should be inbetter case than if they went up one by one.

　　"So be it," they said, and the councillors assented.

　　Now, as he fled round and round, Umslopogaas had seen the face ofGalazi, his brother, in the throng, and knew that he hungered to sharethe fight. So he called aloud that he whom he should choose, and whowould stand back to back with him in the fray, if victory were theirs,should be the first after him among the People of the Axe, and as hecalled, he walked slowly down the line scanning the faces of all, tillhe came to where Galazi stood leaning on the Watcher.

　　"Here is a great fellow who bears a great club," said Umslopogaas."How are you named, fellow?"

　　"I am named Wolf," answered Galazi.

　　"Say, now, Wolf, are you willing to stand back to back with me in thisfray of two against ten? If victory is ours, you shall be next to meamongst this people."

　　"Better I love the wild woods and the mountain's breast than thekraals of men and the kiss of wives, Axebearer," answered Galazi."Yet, because you have shown yourself a warrior of might, and to tasteagain of the joy of battle, I will stand back to back with you,Axebearer, and see this matter ended."

　　"A bargain, Wolf!" cried Umslopogaas. And they walked side by side--amighty pair!--till they came to the centre of the cattle kraal. Allthere looked on them wondering, and it came into the thoughts of someof them that these were none other than the Wolf-Brethren who dweltupon the Ghost Mountain.

　　"Now axe Groan-maker and club Watcher are come together, Galazi," saidUmslopogaas as they walked, "and I think that few can stand beforethem."

　　"Some shall find it so," answered Galazi. "At the least, the fray willbe merry, and what matter how frays end?"

　　"Ah," said Umslopogaas, "victory is good, but death ends all and isbest of all."

　　Then they spoke of the fashion in which they would fight, andUmslopogaas looked curiously at the axe he carried, and at the pointon its hammer, balancing it in his hand. When he had looked long, thepair took their stand back to back in the centre of the kraal, andpeople saw that Umslopogaas held the axe in a new fashion, its curvedblade being inwards towards his breast, and the hollow point turnedtowards the foe. The ten brethren gathered themselves together,shaking their assegais; five of them stood before Umslopogaas and fivebefore Galazi the Wolf. They were all great men, made fierce with rageand shame.

　　"Now nothing except witchcraft can save these two," said a councillorto one who stood by him.

　　"Yet there is virtue in the axe," answered the other, "and for theclub, it seems that I know it: I think it is named Watcher of theFords, and woe to those who stand before the Watcher. I myself haveseen him aloft when I was young; moreover, these are no cravens whohold the axe and the club. They are but lads, indeed, yet they havedrunk wolf's milk."

　　Meanwhile, an aged man drew near to speak the word of onset; it wasthat same man who had set out the law to Umslopogaas. He must give thesignal by throwing up a spear, and when it struck the ground, then thefight would begin. The old man took the spear and threw it, but hishand was weak, and he cast so clumsily that it fell among the sons ofJikiza, who stood before Umslopogaas, causing them to open up to letit pass between them, and drawing the eyes of all ten of them to it.but Umslopogaas watched for the touching of the spear only, beingcareless where it touched. As the point of it kissed the earth, hesaid a word, and lo! Umslopogaas and Galazi, not waiting for theonslaught of the ten, as men had thought they must, sprang forward,each at the line of foes who were before him. While the ten stillstood confused, for it had been their plan to attack, the Wolf-Brethren were upon them. Groan-Maker was up, but as for no greatstroke. He did but peck, as a bird pecks with his bill, and yet a mandropped dead. The Watcher also was up, but he fell like a fallingtree, and was the death of one. Through the lines of the ten passedthe Wolf-Brethren in the gaps that each had made. Then they turnedswiftly and charged towards each other again; again Groan-Makerpecked, again the Watcher thundered, and lo! once more Umslopogaasstood back to back unhurt, but before them lay four men dead.

　　The onslaught and the return were so swift, that men scarcelyunderstood what had been done; even those of the sons of Jikiza whowere left stared at each other wondering. Then they knew that theywere but six, for four of them were dead. With a shout of rage theyrushed upon the pair from both sides, but in either case one was themost eager, and outstepped the other two, and thus it came about thattime was given the Wolf-Brethren to strike at him alone, before hisfellows were at his side. He who came at Umslopogaas drove at him withhis spear, but he was not to be caught this, for he bent his middlesideways, so that the spear only cut his skin, and as he bent tappedwith the point of the axe at the head of the smiter, dealing death onhim.

　　"Yonder Woodpecker has a bill of steel, and he can use it well," saidthe councillor to him who stood by him.

　　"This is a Slaughterer indeed," the man answered, and the people heardthe names. Thenceforth they knew Umslopogaas as the Woodpecker, and asBulalio, or the Slaughterer, and by no other names. Now, he who cameat Galazi the Wolf rushed on wildly, holding his spear short. ButGalazi was cunning in war. He took one step forward to meet him, then,swinging the Watcher backward, he let him fall at the full length ofarms and club. The child of Jikiza lifted his shield to catch theblow, but the shield was to the Watcher what a leaf is to the wind.Full on its hide the huge club fell, making a loud sound; the war-shield doubled up like a raw skin, and he who bore it fell crushed tothe earth.

　　Now for a moment, the four who were left of the sons of Jikiza hoveredround the pair, feinting at them from afar, but never coming withinreach of axe or club. One threw a spear indeed, and though Umslopogaasleaped aside, and as it sped towards him smote the haft in two withthe blade of Groan-Maker, yet its head flew on, wounding Galazi in theflank. Then he who had thrown the spear turned to fly, for his handswere empty, and the others followed swiftly, for the heart was out ofthem, and they dared to do battle with these two no more.

　　Thus the fight was ended, and from its beginning till the finish wasnot longer than the time in which men might count a hundred slowly.

　　"It seems that none are left for us to kill, Galazi," saidUmslopogaas, laughing aloud. "Ah, that was a cunning fight! Ho! yousons of the Unconquered, who run so fast, stay your feet. I give youpeace; you shall live to sweep my huts and to plough my fields withthe other women of my kraal. Now, councillors, the fighting is done,so let us to the chief's hut, where Masilo waits us," and he turnedand went with Galazi, and after him followed all the people, wonderingand in silence.

　　When he reached the hut Umslopogaas sat himself down in the placewhere Jikiza had sat that morning, and the maid Zinita came to himwith a wet cloth and washed the wound that the spear had made. Hethanked her; then she would have washed Galazi's wound also, and thiswas deeper, but Galazi bade her to let him be roughly, as he wouldhave no woman meddling with his wounds. For neither then nor at anyother time did Galazi turn to women, but he hated Zinita most of themall.

　　Then Umslopogaas spoke to Masilo the Pig, who sat before him with afrightened face, saying, "It seems, O Masilo, that you have soughtthis maid Zinita in marriage, and against her will, persecuting her.Now I had intended to kill you as an offering to her anger, but therehas been enough blood-letting to-day. Yet you shall have a marriagegift to this girl, whom I myself will take in marriage: you shall givea hundred head of cattle. Then get you gone from among the People ofthe Axe, lest a worse thing befall you, Masilo the Pig."

　　So Masilo rose up and went, and his face was green with fear, but hepaid the hundred head of cattle and fled towards the kraal of Chaka.Zinita watched him go, and she was glad of it, and because theSlaughterer had named her for his wife.

　　"I am well rid of Masilo," she said aloud, in the hearing of Galazi,"but I had been better pleased to see him dead before me."

　　"This woman has a fierce heart," thought Galazi, "and she will bringno good to Umslopogaas, my brother."

　　Now the councillors and the captains of the People of the Axe konzaedto him whom they named the Slaughterer, doing homage to him as chiefand holder of the axe, and also they did homage to the axe itself. SoUmslopogaas became chief over this people, and their number was many,and he grew great and fat in cattle and wives, and none dared togainsay him. From time to time, indeed, a man ventured to stand upbefore him in fight, but none could conquer him, and in a little whileno one sought to face Groan-Maker when he lifted himself to peck.

　　Galazi also was great among the people, but dwelt with them little,for best he loved the wild woods and the mountain's breast, and often,as of old, he swept at night across the forest and the plains, and thehowling of the ghost-wolves went with him.

　　But henceforth Umslopogaas the Slaughterer hunted very rarely with thewolves at night; he slept at the side of Zinita, and she loved himmuch and bore him children.

　　CHAPTER XVIII

　　THE CURSE OF BALEKA

　　Now, my father, my story winds back again as the river bends towardsits source, and I tell of those events which happened at the king'skraal of Gibamaxegu, which you white people name Gibbeclack, the kraalthat is called "Pick-out-the-old-men," for it was there that Chakamurdered all the aged who were unfit for war.

　　After I, Mopo, had stood before the king, and he had given me newwives and fat cattle and a kraal to dwell in, the bones of Unandi, theGreat Mother Elephant, Mother of the Heavens, were gathered togetherfrom the ashes of my huts, and because all could not be found, some ofthe bones of my wives were collected also to make up the number. ButChaka never knew this. When all were brought together, a great pit wasdug and the bones were set out in order in the pit and buried; but notalone, for round them were placed twelve maidens of the servants ofUnandi, and these maidens were covered over with the earth, and leftto die in the pit by the bones of Unandi, their mistress. Moreover,all those who were present at the burial were made into a regiment andcommanded that they should dwell by the grave for the space of a year.They were many, my father, but I was not one of them. Also Chaka gaveorders that no crops should be sown that year, that the milk of thecows should be spilled upon the ground, and that no woman should givebirth to a child for a full year, and that if any should dare to bearchildren, then that they should be slain and their husbands with them.And for a space of some months these things were done, my father, andgreat sorrow came upon the land.

　　Then for a little while there was quiet, and Chaka went about heavily,and he wept often, and we who waited on him wept also as we walked,till at length it came about by use that we could weep without ceasingfor many hours. No angry woman can weep as we wept in those days; itwas an art, my father, for the teaching of which I received manycattle, for woe to him who had no tears in those days. Then it wasalso that Chaka sent out the captain and fifty soldiers to search forUmslopogaas, for, though he said nothing more to me of this matter, hedid not believe all the tale that I had told him of the death ofUmslopogaas in the jaws of a lion and the tale of those who were withme. How that company fared at the hands of Umslopogaas and of Galazithe Wolf, and at the fangs of the people black and grey, I have toldyou, my father. None of them ever came back again. In after days itwas reported to the king that these soldiers were missing, neverhaving returned, but he only laughed, saying that the lion which ateUmslopogaas, son of Mopo, was a fierce one, and had eaten them also.

　　At last came the night of the new moon, that dreadful night to befollowed by a more dreadful morrow. I sat in the kraal of Chaka, andhe put his arm about my neck and groaned and wept for his mother, whomhe had murdered, and I groaned also, but I did not weep, because itwas dark, and on the morrow I must weep much in the sight of king andmen. Therefore, I spared my tears, lest they should fail me in myneed.

　　All night long the people drew on from every side towards the kraal,and, as they came in thousands and tens of thousands, they filled thenight with their cries, till it seemed as though the whole world weremourning, and loudly. None might cease their crying, and none dared todrink so much as a cup of water. The daylight came, and Chaka rose,saying, "Come, let us go forth, Mopo, and look on those who mourn withus." So we went out, and after us came men armed with clubs to do thebidding of the king.

　　Outside the kraal the people were gathered, and their number wascountless as the leaves upon the trees. On every side the land wasblack with them, as at times the veldt is black with game. When theysaw the king they ceased from their howling and sang the war-song,then once again they howled, and Chaka walked among them weeping. Now,my father, the sight became dreadful, for, as the sun rose higher theday grew hot, and utter weariness came upon the people, who werepacked together like herds of cattle, and, though oxen slain insacrifice lay around, they might neither eat nor drink. Some fell tothe ground, and were trampled to death, others took too much snuff tomake them weep, others stained their eyes with saliva, others walkedto and fro, their tongues hanging from their jaws, while groans brokefrom their parched throats.

　　"Now, Mopo, we shall learn who are the wizards that have brought theseills upon us," said the king, "and who are the true-hearted men."

　　As we spoke we cam upon a man, a chief of renown. He was namedZwaumbana, chief of the Amabovus, and with him were his wives andfollowers. This man could weep no more; he gasped with thirst andheat. The king looked at him.

　　"See, Mopo," he said, "see that brute who has no tears for my motherwho is dead! Oh, the monster without a heart! Shall such as he live tolook upon the sun, while I and thou must weep, Mopo? Never! never!Take him away, and all those who are with him! Take them away, thepeople without hearts, who do not weep because my mother is dead bywitchcraft!"

　　And Chaka walked on weeping, and I followed also weeping, but thechief Zwaumbana and those with him were all slain by those who do thebidding of the king, and the slayers also must weep as they slew.Presently we came upon another man, who, seeing the king, took snuffsecretly to bring tears to his eyes. But the glance of Chaka wasquick, and he noted it.

　　"Look at him, Mopo," he said, "look at the wizard who has no tears,though my mother is dead by witchcraft. See, he takes snuff to bringtears to his eyes that are dry with wickedness. Take him away, theheartless brute! Oh, take him away!"

　　So this one also was killed, and these were but the first ofthousands, for presently Chaka grew mad with wickedness, with fury,and with the lust of blood. He walked to and fro, weeping, going nowand again into his hut to drink beer, and I with him, for he said thatwe who sorrowed must have food. And ever as he walked he would wavehis arm or his assegai, saying, "Take them away, the heartless brutes,who do not weep because my mother is dead," and those who chanced tostand before his arm were killed, till at length the slayers couldslay no more, and themselves were slain, because their strength hadfailed them, and they had no more tears. And I also, I must slay, lestif I slew not I should myself be slain.

　　And now, at length, the people also went mad with their thirst and thefury of their fear. They fell upon each other, killing each other;every man who had a foe sought him out and killed him. None werespared, the place was but a shambles; there on that day died fullseven thousand men, and still Chaka walked weeping among them, saying,"Take them away, the heartless brutes, take them away!" Yet, myfather, there was cunning in his cruelty, for though he destroyed manyfor sport alone, also he slew on this day all those whom he hated orwhom he feared.

　　At length the night came down, the sun sank red that day, all the skywas like blood, and blood was all the earth beneath. Then the killingceased, because none had now the strength to kill, and the people laypanting in heaps upon the ground, the living and the dead together. Ilooked at them, and saw that if they were not allowed to eat anddrink, before day dawned again the most of them would be dead, and Ispoke to the king, for I cared little in that hour if I lived or died;even my hope of vengeance was forgotten in the sickness of my heart.

　　"A mourning indeed, O King," I said, "a merry mourning for true-hearted men, but for wizards a mourning such as they do not love. Ithink that thy sorrows are avenged, O King, thy sorrows and minealso."

　　"Not so, Mopo," answered the king, "this is but the beginning; ourmourning was merry to-day, it shall be merrier to-morrow."

　　"To-morrow, O King, few will be left to mourn; for the land will beswept of men."

　　"Why, Mopo, son of Makedama? But a few have perished of all thethousands who are gathered together. Number the people and they willnot be missed."

　　"But a few have died beneath the assegai and the kerrie, O King. Yethunger and thirst shall finish the spear's work. The people haveneither eaten nor drunk for a day and a night, and for a day and anight they have wailed and moaned. Look without, Black One, there theylie in heaps with the dead. By to-morrow's light they also will bedead or dying."

　　Now, Chaka thought awhile, and he saw that the work would go too far,leaving him but a small people over whom to rule.

　　"It is hard, Mopo," he said, "that thou and I must mourn alone overour woes while these dogs feast and make merry. Yet, because of thegentleness of my heart, I will deal gently with them. Go out, son ofMakedama, and bid my children eat and drink if they have the heart,for this mourning is ended. Scarcely will Unandi, my mother, sleepwell, seeing that so little blood has been shed on her grave--surelyher spirit will haunt my dreams. Yet, because of the gentleness of myheart, I declare this mourning ended. Let my children eat and drink,if, indeed, they have the heart."

　　"Happy are the people over whom such a king is set," I said in answer.Then I went out and told the words of Chaka to the chiefs andcaptains, and those of them who had the voice left to them praised thegoodness of the king. But the most gave over sucking the dew fromtheir sticks, and rushed to the water like cattle that have wanderedfive days in the desert, and drank their fill. Some of them weretrampled to death in the water.

　　Afterwards I slept as I might best; it was not well, my father, for Iknew that Chaka was not yet gutted with slaughter.

　　On the morrow many of the people went back to their homes, havingsought leave from the king, others drew away the dead to the place ofbones, and yet others were sent out in impis to kill such as had notcome to the mourning of the king. When midday was past, Chaka saidthat he would walk, and ordered me and other of his indunas andservants to walk with him. We went on in silence, the king leaning onmy shoulder as on a stick. "What of thy people, Mopo," he said atlength, "what of the Langeni tribe? Were they at my mourning? I didnot see them."

　　Then I answered that I did not know, they had been summoned, but theway was long and the time short for so many to march so far.

　　"Dogs should run swiftly when their master calls, Mopo, my servant,"said Chaka, and the dreadful light came into his eyes that never shonein the eyes of any other man. Then I grew sick at heart, my father--ay, though I loved my people little, and they had driven me away, Igrew sick at heart. Now we had come to a spot where there is a greatrift of black rock, and the name of that rift is U'Donga-lu-ka-Tatiyana. On either side of this donga the ground slopes steeply downtowards its yawning lips, and from its end a man may see the opencountry. Here Chaka sat down at the end of the rift, pondering.Presently he looked up and saw a vast multitude of men, women, andchildren, who wound like a snake across the plain beneath towards thekraal Gibamaxegu.

　　"I think, Mopo," said the king, "that by the colour of their shields,yonder should be the Langeni tribe--thine own people, Mopo."

　　"It is my people, O King," I answered.

　　Then Chaka sent messengers, running swiftly, and bade them summon theLangeni people to him where he sat. Other messengers he sent also tothe kraal, whispering in their ears, but what he said I did not knowthen.

　　Now, for a while, Chaka watched the long black snake of men windingtowards him across the plain till the messengers met them and thesnake began to climb the slope of the hill.

　　"How many are these people of thine, Mopo?" asked the king.

　　"I know not, O Elephant," I answered, "who have not seen them for manyyears. Perhaps they number three full regiments."

　　"Nay, more," said the king; "what thinkest thou, Mopo, would thispeople of thine fill the rift behind us?" and he nodded at the gulf ofstone.

　　Now, my father, I trembled in all my flesh, seeing the purpose ofChaka; but I could find no words to say, for my tongue clave to theroof of my mouth.

　　"The people are many," said Chaka, "yet, Mopo, I bet thee fifty headof cattle that they will not fill the donga."

　　"The king is pleased to jest," I said.

　　"Yea, Mopo, I jest; yet as a jest take thou the bet."

　　"As the king wills," I murmured--who could not refuse. Now the peopleof my tribe drew near: at their head was an old man, with white hairand beard, and, looking at him, I knew him for my father, Makedama.When he came within earshot of the king, he gave him the royal saluteof Bayete, and fell upon his hands and knees, crawling towards him,and konzaed to the king, praising him as he came. All the thousands ofthe people also fell on their hands and knees, and praised the kingaloud, and the sound of their praising was like the sound of a greatthunder.

　　At length Makedama, my father, writhing on his breast like a snake,lay before the majesty of the king. Chaka bade him rise, and greetedhim kindly; but all the thousands of the people yet lay upon theirbreasts beating the dust with their heads.

　　"Rise, Makedama, my child, father of the people of the Langeni," saidChaka, "and tell me why art thou late in coming to my mourning?"

　　"The way was far, O King," answered Makedama, my father, who did notknow me. "The way was far and the time short. Moreover, the women andthe children grew weary and footsore, and they are weary in thishour."

　　"Speak not of it, Makedama, my child," said the king. "Surely thyheart mourned and that of thy people, and soon they shall rest fromtheir weariness. Say, are they here every one?"

　　"Every one, O Elephant!--none are wanting. My kraals are desolate, thecattle wander untended on the hills, birds pick at the unguardedcrops."

　　"It is well, Makedama, thou faithful servant! Yet thou wouldst mournwith me an hour--is it not so? Now, hearken! Bid thy people pass tothe right and to the left of me, and stand in all their numbers uponthe slopes of the grass that run down to the lips of the rift."

　　So Makedama, my father, bade the people do the bidding of the king,for neither he nor the indunas saw his purpose, but I, who knew hiswicked heart, I saw it. Then the people filed past to the right and tothe left by hundreds and by thousands, and presently the grass of theslopes could be seen no more, because of their number. When all hadpassed, Chaka spoke again to Makedama, my father, bidding him climbdown to the bottom of the donga, and thence lift up his voice inmourning. The old man obeyed the king. Slowly, and with much pain, heclambered to the bottom of the rift and stood there. It was so deepand narrow that the light scarcely seemed to reach to where he stood,for I could only see the white of his hair gleaming far down in theshadows.

　　Then, standing far beneath, he lifted up his voice, and it reached thethousands of those who clustered upon the slopes. It seemed still andsmall, yet it came to them faintly like the voice of one speaking froma mountain-top in a time of snow:--

　　"Mourn, children of Makedama!"

　　And all the thousands of the people--men, women, and children--echoedhis words in a thunder of sound, crying:--

　　"Mourn, children of Makedama!"

　　Again he cried:--

　　"Mourn, people of the Langeni, mourn with the whole world!"

　　And the thousands answered:--

　　"Mourn, people of the Langeni, mourn with the whole world!"

　　A third time came his voice:--

　　"Mourn, children of Makedama, mourn, people of the Langeni, mourn withthe whole world!

　　"Howl, ye warriors; weep, ye women; beat your breasts, ye maidens;sob, ye little children!

　　"Drink of the water of tears, cover yourselves with the dust ofaffliction.

　　"Mourn, O tribe of the Langeni, because the Mother of the Heavens isno more.

　　"Mourn, children of Makedama, because the Spirit of Fruitfulness is nomore.

　　"Mourn, O ye people, because the Lion of the Zulu is left so desolate.

　　"Let your tears fall as the rain falls, let your cries be as the criesof women who bring forth.

　　"For sorrow is fallen like the rain, the world has conceived andbrought forth death.

　　"Great darkness is upon us, darkness and the shadow of death.

　　"The Lion of the Zulu wanders and wanders in desolation, because theMother of the Heavens is no more.

　　"Who shall bring him comfort? There is comfort in the crying of hischildren.

　　"Mourn, people of the Langeni; let the voice of your mourning beatagainst the skies and rend them.

　　"Ou-ai! Ou-ai! Ou-ai!"

　　Thus sang the old man, my father Makedama, far down in the deeps ofthe cleft. He sang it in a still, small voice, but, line after line,his song was caught up by the thousands who stood on the slopes above,and thundered to the heavens till the mountains shook with its sound.Moreover, the noise of their crying opened the bosom of a heavy rain-cloud that had gathered as they mourned, and the rain fell in greatslow drops, as though the sky also wept, and with the rain camelightning and the roll of thunder.

　　Chaka listened, and large tears coursed down his cheeks, whose heartwas easily stirred by the sound of song. Now the rain hissed fiercely,making as it were a curtain about the thousands of the people; butstill their cry went up through the rain, and the roll of the thunderwas lost in it. Presently there came a hush, and I looked to theright. There, above the heads of the people, coming over the brow ofthe hill, were the plumes of warriors, and in their hands gleamed ahedge of spears. I looked to the left; there also I saw the plumes ofwarriors dimly through the falling rain, and in their hands a hedge ofspears. I looked before me, towards the end of the cleft; there alsoloomed the plumes of warriors, and in their hands was a hedge ofspears.

　　Then, from all the people there arose another cry, a cry of terror andof agony.

　　"Ah! now they mourn indeed, Mopo," said Chaka in my ear; "now thypeople mourn from the heart and not with the lips alone."

　　As he spoke the multitude of the people on either side of the riftsurged forward like a wave, surged back again, once more surgedforward, then, with a dreadful crying, driven on by the mercilessspears of the soldiers, they began to fall in a torrent of men, women,and children, far into the black depths below.

　　*       *       *       *       *

　　My father, forgive me the tears that fall from these blind eyes ofmine; I am very aged, I am but as a little child, and as a littlechild I weep. I cannot tell it. At last it was done, and all grewstill.

　　*       *       *       *       *

　　Thus was Makedama buried beneath the bodies of his people; thus wasended the tribe of the Langeni; as my mother had dreamed, so it cameabout; and thus did Chaka take vengeance for that cup of milk whichwas refused to him many a year before.

　　"Thou hast not won thy bet, Mopo," said the king presently. "See thereis a little space where one more may find room to sleep. Full to thebrim is this corn-chamber with the ears of death, in which no livinggrain is left. Yet there is one little space, and is there not one tofill it? Are all the tribe of the Langeni dead indeed?"

　　"There is one, O King!" I answered. "I am of the tribe of the Langeni,let my carcase fill the place."

　　"Nay, Mopo, nay! Who then should take the bet? Moreover, I slay theenot, for it is against my oath. Also, do we not mourn together, thouand I?"

　　"There is no other left living of the tribe of the Langeni, O King!The bet is lost; it shall be paid."

　　"I think that there is another," said Chaka. "There is a sister tothee and me, Mopo. Ah, see, she comes!"

　　I looked up, my father, and I saw this: I saw Baleka, my sister,walking towards us, and on her shoulders was a kaross of wild-catskins, and behind her were two soldiers. She walked proudly, holdingher head high, and her step was like the step of a queen. Now she sawthe sight of death, for the dead lay before her like black water in asunless pool. A moment she stood shivering, having guessed all, thenwalked on and stood before Chaka.

　　"What is thy will with me, O King?" she said.

　　"Thou art come in a good hour, sister," said Chaka, turning his eyesfrom hers. "It is thus: Mopo, my servant and thy brother, made a betwith me, a bet of cattle. It was a little matter that we wagered on--as to whether the people of the Langeni tribe--thine own tribe,Baleka, my sister--would fill yonder place, U'Donga-lu-ka-Tatiyana.When they heard of the bet, my sister, the people of the Langenihurled themselves into the rift by thousands, being eager to put thematter to the proof. And now it seems that thy brother has lost thebet, for there is yet place for one yonder ere the donga is full.Then, my sister, thy brother Mopo brought it to my mind that there wasstill one of the Langeni tribe left upon the earth, who, should shesleep in that place, would turn the bet in his favour, and prayed meto send for her. So, my sister, as I would not take that which I havenot won, I have done so, and now do thou go apart and talk with Mopo,thy brother, alone upon this matter, as once before thou didst talkwhen a child was born to thee, my sister!"

　　Now Baleka took no heed of the words of Chaka which he spoke of me,for she knew his meaning well. Only she looked him in the eyes andsaid:--

　　"Ill shalt thou sleep from this night forth, Chaka, till thou comestto a land where no sleep is. I have spoken."

　　Chaka saw and heard, and of a sudden he quailed, growing afraid in hisheart, and turned his head away.

　　"Mopo, my brother," said Baleka, "let us speak together for the lasttime; it is the king's word."

　　So I drew apart with Baleka, my sister, and a spear was in my hand. Westood together alone by the people of the dead and Baleka threw thecorner of the kaross about her brows and spoke to me swiftly frombeneath its shadow.

　　"What did I say to you a while ago, Mopo? It has come to pass. Swearto me that you will live on and that this same hand of yours shalltaken vengeance for me."

　　"I swear it, my sister."

　　"Swear to me that when the vengeance is done you will seek out my sonUmslopogaas if he still lives, and bless him in my name."

　　"I swear it, my sister."

　　"Fare you well, Mopo! We have always loved each other much, and nowall fades, and it seems to me that once more we are little childrenplaying about the kraals of the Langeni. So may we play again inanother land! Now, Mopo"--and she looked at me steadily, and withgreat eyes--"I am weary. I would join the spirits of my people. I hearthem calling in my ears. It is finished."

　　*       *       *       *       *

　　For the rest, I will not tell it to you, my father.

　　CHAPTER XIX

　　MASILO COMES TO THE KRAAL DUGUZA

　　That night the curse of Baleka fell upon Chaka, and he slept ill. Soill did he sleep that he summoned me to him, bidding me walk abroadwith him. I went, and we walked alone and in silence, Chaka leadingthe way and I following after him. Now I saw that his feet led himtowards the U'Donga-lu-ka-Tatiyana, that place where all my people laydead, and with them Baleka, my sister. We climbed the slope of thehill slowly, and came to the mouth of the cleft, to that same spotwhere Chaka had stood when the people fell over the lips of the rocklike water. Then there had been noise and crying, now there wassilence, for the night was very still. The moon was full also, andlighted up the dead who lay near to us, so that I could see them all;yes, I could see even the face of Baleka, my sister--they had thrownher into the midst of the dead. Never had it looked so beautiful as inthis hour, and yet as I gazed I grew afraid. Only the far end of thedonga was hid in shadow.

　　"Thou wouldst not have won thy bet now, Mopo, my servant," said Chaka."See, they have sunk together! The donga is not full by the length ofa stabbing-spear."

　　I did not answer, but at the sound of the king's voice jackals stirredand slunk away.

　　Presently he spoke again, laughing loudly as he spoke: "Thou shouldstsleep well this night, my mother, for I have sent many to hush thee torest. Ah, people of the Langeni tribe, you forgot, but I remembered!You forgot how a woman and a boy came to you seeking food and shelter,and you would give them none--no, not a gourd of milk. What did Ipromise you on that day, people of the Langeni tribe? Did I notpromise you that for every drop the gourd I craved would hold I wouldtake the life of a man? And have I not kept my promise? Do not men liehere more in number than the drops of water in a gourd, and with themwoman and children countless as the leaves? O people of the Langenitribe, who refused me milk when I was little, having grown great, I amavenged upon you! Having grown great! Ah! who is there so great as I?The earth shakes beneath my feet; when I speak the people tremble,when I frown they die--they die in thousands. I have grown great, andgreat I shall remain! The land is mine, far as the feet of man cantravel the land is mine, and mine are those who dwell in it. And Ishall grow greater yet--greater, ever greater. Is it thy face, Baleka,that stares upon me from among the faces of the thousands whom I haveslain? Thou didst promise me that I should sleep ill henceforth.Baleka, I fear thee not--at the least, thou sleepest sound. Tell me,Baleka--rise from thy sleep and tell me whom there is that I shouldfear!"--and suddenly he ceased the ravings of his pride.

　　Now, my father, while Chaka the king spoke thus, it came into my mindto make an end of things and kill him, for my heart was made with rageand the thirst of vengeance. Already I stood behind him, already thestick in my hand was lifted to strike out his brains, when I stoppedalso, for I saw something. There, in the midst of the dead, I saw anarm stir. It stirred, it lifted itself, it beckoned towards the shadowwhich hid the head of the cleft and the piled-up corpses that laythere, and it seemed to me that the arm was the arm of Baleka.Perchance it was not her arm, perchance it was but the arm of one whoyet lived among the thousands of the dead, say you, my father! At theleast, the arm rose at her side, and was ringed with such bracelets asBaleka wore, and it beckoned from her side, though her cold facechanged not at all. Thrice the arm rose, thrice it stood awhile inair, thrice it beckoned with crooked finger, as though it summonedsomething from the depths of the shadow, and from the multitudes ofthe dead. Then it fell down, and in the utter silence I heard its falland a clank of brazen bracelets. And as it fell there rose from theshadow a sound of singing, of singing wild and sweet, such as I hadnever heard. The words of that song came to me then, my father; butafterwards they passed from me, and I remember them no more. Only Iknow this, that the song was of the making of Things, and of thebeginning and the end of Peoples. It told of how the black folk grew,and of how the white folk should eat them up, and wherefore they wereand wherefore they should cease to be. It told of Evil and of Good, ofWoman and of Man, and of how these war against each other, and why itis that they war, and what are the ends of the struggle. It told alsoof the people of the Zulu, and it spoke of a place of a Little Handwhere they should conquer, and of a place where a White Hand shouldprevail against them, and how they shall melt away beneath the shadowof the White Hand and be forgotten, passing to a land where things donot die, but live on forever, the Good with the Good, the Evil withthe Evil. It told of Life and of Death, of Joy and of Sorrow, of Timeand of that sea in which Time is but a floating leaf, and of why allthese things are. Many names also came into the song, and I knew but afew of them, yet my own was there, and the name of Baleka and the nameof Umslopogaas, and the name of Chaka the Lion. But a little while didthe voice sing, yet all this was in the song--ay, and much more; butthe meaning of the song is gone from me, though I knew it once, andshall know it again when all is done. The voice in the shadow sang ontill the whole place was full of the sound of its singing, and eventhe dead seemed to listen. Chaka heard it and shook with fear, but hisears were deaf to its burden, though mine were open.

　　The voice came nearer, and now in the shadow there was a faint glow oflight, like the glow that gathers on the six-days' dead. Slowly itdrew nearer, through the shadow, and as it came I saw that the shapeof the light was the shape of a woman. Now I could see it well, and Iknew the face of glory. My father, it was the face of the Inkosazana-y-Zulu, the Queen of Heaven! She came towards us very slowly, glidingdown the gulf that was full of dead, and the path she trod was pavedwith the dead; and as she came it seemed to me that shadows rose fromthe dead, following her, the Queen of the Dead--thousands uponthousands of them. And, ah! her glory, my father--the glory of herhair of molten gold--of her eyes, that were as the noonday sky--theflash of her arms and breast, that were like the driven snow, when itglows in the sunset. Her beauty was awful to look on, but I am glad tohave lived to see it as it shone and changed in the shifting robe oflight which was her garment.

　　Now she drew near to us, and Chaka sank upon the earth, huddled up infear, hiding his face in his hands; but I was not afraid, my father--only the wicked need fear to look on the Queen of Heaven. Nay, I wasnot afraid: I stood upright and gazed upon her glory face to face. Inher hand she held a little spear hafted with the royal wood: it wasthe shadow of the spear that Chaka held in his hand, the same withwhich he had slain his mother and wherewith he should himself beslain. Now she ceased her singing, and stood before the crouching kingand before me, who was behind the king, so that the light of her gloryshone upon us. She lifted the little spear, and with it touched Chaka,son of Senzangacona, on the brow, giving him to doom. Then she spoke;but, though Chaka felt the touch, he did not hear the words, that werefor my ears alone.

　　"Mopo, son of Makedama," said the low voice, "stay thy hand, the cupof Chaka is not full. When, for the third time, thou seest me ridingdown the storm, then SMITE, Mopo, my child."

　　Thus she spoke, and a cloud swept over the face of the moon. When itpassed she was gone, and once more I was alone with Chaka, with thenight and the dead.

　　Chaka looked up, and his face was grey with the sweat of fear.

　　"Who was this, Mopo?" he said in a hollow voice.

　　"This was the Inkosazana of the Heavens, she who watches ever over thepeople of our race, O King, and who from time to time is seen of menere great things shall befall."

　　"I have heard speak of this queen," said Chaka. "Wherefore came shenow, what was the song she sang, and why did she touch me with aspear?"

　　"She came, O King, because the dead hand of Baleka summoned her, asthou sawest. The song she sang was of things too high for me; and whyshe touched thee on the forehead with the spear I do not know, O King!Perchance it was to crown thee chief of a yet greater realm."

　　"Yea, perchance to crown me chief of a realm of death."

　　"That thou art already, Black One," I answered, glancing at the silentmultitude before us and the cold shape of Baleka.

　　Again Chaka shuddered. "Come, let us be going, Mopo," he said; "now Ihave learnt what it is to be afraid."

　　"Early or late, Fear is a guest that all must feast, even kings, OEarth-Shaker!" I answered; and we turned and went homewards insilence.

　　Now after this night Chaka gave it out that the kraal of Gibamaxeguwas bewitched, and bewitched was the land of the Zulus, because hemight sleep no more in peace, but woke ever crying out with fear, andmuttering the name of Baleka. Therefore, in the end he moved his kraalfar away, and built the great town of Duguza here in Natal.

　　Look now, my father! There on the plain far away is a place of thewhite men--it is called Stanger. There, where is the white man's town,stood the great kraal Duguza. I cannot see, for my eyes are dark; butyou can see. Where the gate of the kraal was built there is a house;it is the place where the white man gives out justice; that is theplace of the gate of the kraal, through which Justice never walked.Behind is another house, where the white men who have sinned againstHim pray to the King of Heaven for forgiveness; there on that spothave I seen many a one who had done no wrong pray to a king of men formercy, but I have never seen but one who found it. Ou! the words ofChaka have come true: I will tell them to you presently, my father.The white man holds the land, he goes to and fro about his business ofpeace where impis ran forth to kill; his children laugh and gatherflowers where men died in blood by hundreds; they bathe in the watersof the Imbozamo, where once the crocodiles were fed daily with humanflesh; his young men woo the maidens where other maids have kissed theassegai. It is changed, nothing is the same, and of Chaka are leftonly a grave yonder and a name of fear.

　　Now, after Chaka had come to the Duguza kraal, for a while he satquiet, then the old thirst of blood came on him, and he sent his impisagainst the people of the Pondos, and they destroyed that people, andbrought back their cattle. But the warriors might not rest; again theywere doctored for war, and sent out by tens of thousands to conquerSotyangana, chief of the people who live north of the Limpopo. Theywent singing, after the king had looked upon them and bidden themreturn victorious or not at all. Their number was so great that fromthe hour of dawn till the sun was high in the heavens they passed thegates of the kraal like countless herds of cattle--they theunconquered. Little did they know that victory smiled on them no more;that they must die by thousands of hunger and fever in the marshes ofthe Limpopo, and that those of them who returned should come withtheir shields in their bellies, having devoured their shields becauseof their ravenous hunger! But what of them? They were nothing. "Dust"was the name of one of the great regiments that went out againstSotyangana, and dust they were--dust to be driven to death by thebreath of Chaka, Lion of the Zulu.

　　Now few men remained in the kraal Duguza, for nearly all had gone withthe impi, and only women and aged people were left. Dingaan andUmhlangana, brothers of the king, were there, for Chaka would notsuffer them to depart, fearing lest they should plot against him, andhe looked on them always with an angry eye, so that they trembled fortheir lives, though they dared not show their fear lest fate shouldfollow fear. But I guessed it, and like a snake I wound myself intotheir secrets, and we talked together darkly and in hints. But of thatpresently, my father, for I must tell of the coming of Masilo, he whowould have wed Zinita, and whom Umslopogaas the Slaughterer had drivenout from the kraals of the People of the Axe.

　　It was on the day after the impi had left that Masilo came to thekraal Duguza, craving leave to speak with the king. Chaka sat beforehis hut, and with him were Dingaan and Umhlangana, his royal brothers.I was there also, and certain of the indunas, councillors of the king.Chaka was weary that morning, for he had slept badly, as now he alwaysdid. Therefore, when one told him that a certain wanderer named Masilowould speak with him, he did not command that the man should bekilled, but bade them bring him before him. Presently there was asound of praising, and I saw a fat man, much worn with travel, whocrawled through the dust towards us giving the sibonga, that is,naming the king by his royal names. Chaka bade him cease from praisingand tell his business. Then the man sat up and told all that talewhich you have heard, my father, of how a young man, great and strong,came to the place of the People of the Axe and conquered Jikiza, theholder of the axe, and become chief of that people, and of how he hadtaken the cattle of Masilo and driven him away. Now Chaka knew nothingof this People of the Axe, for the land was great in those days, myfather, and there were many little tribes in it, living far away, ofwhom the king had not even heard; so he questioned Masilo about them,and of the number of their fighting-men, of their wealth in cattle, ofthe name of the young man who ruled them, and especially as to thetribute which they paid to the king.

　　Masilo answered, saying that the number of their fighting-men wasperhaps the half of a full regiment, that their cattle were many, forthey were rich, that they paid no tribute, and that the name of theyoung man was Bulalio the Slaughterer--at the least, he was known bythat name, and he had heard no other.

　　Then the king grew wroth. "Arise, Masilo," he said, "and run to thispeople, and speak in the ear of the people, and of him who is namedthe Slaughterer, saying: 'There is another Slaughterer, who sits in akraal that is named Duguza, and this is his word to you, O People ofthe Axe, and to thee, thou who holdest the axe. Rise up with all thepeople, and with all the cattle of your people, and come before himwho sits in the kraal Duguza, and lay in his hands the great axeGroan-Maker. Rise up swiftly and do this bidding, lest ye sit downshortly and for the last time of all.'"[1]

　　[1] The Zulu are buried sitting.

　　Masilo heard, and said that it should be so, though the way was far,and he feared greatly to appear before him who was called theSlaughterer, and who sat twenty days' journey to the north, beneaththe shadow of the Witch Mountain.

　　"Begone," said the king, "and stand before me on the thirtieth dayfrom now with the answer of this boy with an axe! If thou standest notbefore me, then some shall come to seek thee and the boy with an axealso."

　　So Masilo turned and fled swiftly to do the bidding of the king, andChaka spoke no more of that matter. But I wondered in my heart whothis young man with an axe might be; for I thought that he had dealtwith Jikiza and with the sons of Jikiza as Umslopogaas would havedealt with them had he come to the years of his manhood. But I alsosaid nothing of the matter.

　　Now on this day also there came to me news that my wife Macropha andmy daughter Nada were dead among their people in Swaziland. It wassaid that the men of the chief of the Halakazi tribe had fallen ontheir kraal and put all in it to the assegai, and among them Macrophaand Nada. I heard the news, but I wept no tear, for, my father, I wasso lost in sorrows that nothing could move me any more.

　　CHAPTER XX

　　MOPO BARGAINS WITH THE PRINCES

　　Eight-and-twenty days went by, my father, and on the nine-and-twentieth it befell that Chaka, having dreamed a dream in his troubledsleep, summoned before him certain women of the kraal, to the numberof a hundred or more. Some of these were his women, whom he named his"sisters," and some were maidens not yet given in marriage; but allwere young and fair. Now what this dream of Chaka may have been I donot know, or have forgotten, for in those days he dreamed many dreams,and all his dreams led to one end, the death of men. He sat in frontof his hut scowling, and I was with him. To the left of him weregathered the girls and women, and their knees were weak with fear. Oneby one they were led before him, and stood before him with bowedheads. Then he would bid them be of good cheer, and speak softly tothem, and in the end would ask them this question: "Hast thou, mysister, a cat in thy hut?"

　　Now, some would say that they had a cat, and some would say that theyhad none, and some would stand still and make no answer, being dumbwith fear. But, whatever they said, the end was the same, for the kingwould sigh gently and say: "Fare thee well, my sister; it isunfortunate for thee that there is a cat in thy hut," or "that thereis no cat in thy hut," or "that thou canst not tell me whether therebe a cat in thy hut or no."

　　Then the woman would be taken by the slayers, dragged without thekraal, and their end was swift. So it went on for the most part ofthat day, till sixty-and-two women and girls had been slaughtered. Butat last a maiden was brought before the king, and to this one hersnake had given a ready wit; for when Chaka asked her whether or nothere was a cat in her hut, she answered, saying that she did notknow, "but that there was a half a cat upon her," and she pointed to acat's-skin which was bound about her loins.

　　Then the king laughed, and clapped his hands, saying that at lengthhis dream was answered; and he killed no more that day nor ever again--save once only.

　　That evening my heart was heavy within me, and I cried in my heart,"How long?"--nor might I rest. So I wandered out from the kraal thatwas named Duguza to the great cleft in the mountains yonder, and satdown upon a rock high up in the cleft, so that I could see the widelands rolling to the north and the south, to my right and to my left.Now, the day was drawing towards the night, and the air was verystill, for the heat was great and a tempest was gathering, as I, whoam a Heaven-Herd, knew well. The sun sank redly, flooding the landwith blood; it was as though all the blood that Chaka had shed flowedabout the land which Chaka ruled. Then from the womb of the nightgreat shapes of cloud rose up and stood before the sun, and he crownedthem with his glory, and in their hearts the lightning quivered like ablood of fire. The shadow of their wings fell upon the mountain andthe plains, and beneath their wings was silence. Slowly the sun sank,and the shapes of cloud gathered together like a host at the word ofits captain, and the flicker of the lightning was as the flash of thespears of a host. I looked, and my heart grew afraid. The lightningdied away, the silence deepened and deepened till I could hear it, noleaf moved, no bird called, the world seemed dead--I alone lived inthe dead world.

　　Now, of a sudden, my father, a bright star fell from the height ofheaven and lit upon the crest of the storm, and as it lit the stormburst. The grey air shivered, a moan ran about the rocks and diedaway, then an icy breath burst from the lips of the tempest and rushedacross the earth. It caught the falling star and drove it on towardsme, a rushing globe of fire, and as it came the star grew and tookshape, and the shape it took was the shape of a woman. I knew her now,my father; while she was yet far off I knew her--the Inkosazana whocame as she had promised, riding down the storm. On she swept, borneforward by the blast, and oh! she was terrible to see, for her garmentwas the lightning, lightnings shone from her wide eyes and lightningswere in her streaming hair, while in her hand was a spear of fire, andshe shook it as she came. Now she was at the mouth of the pass; beforeher was stillness, behind her beat the wings of the storm, the thunderroared, the rain hissed like snakes; she rushed on past me, and as shepassed she turned her awful eyes upon me, withering me. She was there!she was gone! but she spoke no word, only shook her flaming spear. Yetit seemed to me that the storm spoke, that the rocks cried aloud, thatthe rain hissed out a word in my ear, and the word was:--

　　"Smite, Mopo!"

　　I heard it in my heart, or with my ears, what does it matter? Then Iturned to look; through the rush of the tempest and the reek of therain, still I could see her sweeping forward high in air. Now thekraal Duguza was beneath her feet, and the flaming spear fell from herhand upon the kraal and fire leaped up in answer.

　　Then she passed on over the edge of the world, seeking her own place.Thus, my father, for the third and last time did my eyes see theInkosazana-y-Zulu, or mayhap my heart dreamed that I saw her. Soon Ishall see her again, but it will not be here.

　　For a while I sat there in the cleft, then I rose and fought my waythrough the fury of the storm back to the kraal Duguza. As I drew nearthe kraal I heard cries of fear coming through the roaring of the windand the hiss of the rain. I entered and asked one of the matter, andit was told me that fire from above had fallen on the hut of the kingas he lay sleeping, and all the roof of the hut was burned away, butthat the rain had put out the fire.

　　Then I went on till I came to the front of the great hut, and I saw bythe light of the moon, which now shone out in the heavens, that therebefore it stood Chaka, shaking with fear, and the water of the rainwas running down him, while he stared at the great hut, of which allthe thatch was burned.

　　I saluted the king, asking him what evil thing had happened. Seeingme, he seized me by the arm, and clung to me as, when the slayers areat hand, a child clings to his father, drawing me after him into asmall hut that was near.

　　"What evil thing has befallen, O King?" I said again, when light hadbeen made.

　　"Little have I known of fear, Mopo," said Chaka, "yet I am afraid now;ay, as much afraid as when once on a bygone night the dead hand ofBaleka summoned something that walked upon the faces of the dead."

　　"And what fearest thou, O King, who art the lord of all the earth?"

　　Now Chaka leaned forward and whispered to me: "Hearken, Mopo, I havedreamed a dream. When the judgment of those witches was done with, Iwent and laid me down to sleep while it was yet light, for I canscarcely sleep at all when darkness has swallowed up the world. Mysleep has gone from me--that sister of thine, Baleka, took my sleepwith her to the place of death. I laid me down and I slept, but adream arose and sat by me with a hooded face, and showed me a picture.It seemed to me that the wall of my hut fell down, and I saw an openplace, and in the centre of the place I lay dead, covered with manywounds, while round my corpse my brothers Dingaan and Umhlanganastalked in pride like lions. On the shoulders of Umhlangana was myroyal kaross, and there was blood on the kaross; and in the hand ofDingaan was my royal spear, and there was blood upon the spear. Then,in the vision of my dream, Mopo, thou didst draw near, and, liftingthy hand, didst give the royal salute of Bayete to these brothers ofmine, and with thy foot didst spurn the carcase of me, thy king. Thenthe hooded Dream pointed upwards and was gone, and I awoke, and lo!fire burned in the roof of my hut. Thus I dreamed, Mopo, and now, myservant, say thou, wherefore should I not slay thee, thou who wouldstserve other kings than I, thou who wouldst give my royal salute to theprinces, my brothers?" and he glared upon me fiercely.

　　"As thou wilt, O King!" I answered gently. "Doubtless thy dream wasevil, and yet more evil was the omen of the fire that fell upon thyhut. And yet--" and I ceased.

　　"And yet--Mopo, thou faithless servant?"

　　"And yet, O King, it seems to me in my folly that it were well tostrike the head of the snake and not its tail, for without the tailthe head may live, but not the tail without the head."

　　"Thou wouldst say, Mopo, that if these princes die never canst thou orany other man give them the royal names. Do I hear aright, Mopo?"

　　"Who am I that I should lift up my voice asking for the blood ofprinces?" I answered. "Judge thou, O King!"

　　Now, Chaka brooded awhile, then he spoke: "Say, Mopo, can it be donethis night?"

　　"There are but few men in the kraal, O King. All are gone out to war;and of those few many are the servants of the princes, and perhapsthey might give blow for blow."

　　"How then, Mopo?"

　　"Nay, I know not, O King; yet at the great kraal beyond the river sitsthat regiment which is named the Slayers. By midday to-morrow theymight be here, and then--"

　　"Thou speakest wisely, my child Mopo; it shall be for to-morrow. Gosummon the regiment of the Slayers, and, Mopo, see that thou fail menot."

　　"If I fail thee, O King, then I fail myself, for it seems that my lifehangs on this matter."

　　"If all the words that ever passed thy lips are lies, yet is that wordtrue, Mopo," said Chaka: "moreover, know this, my servant: if aughtmiscarries thou shalt die no common death. Begone!"

　　"I hear the king," I answered, and went out.

　　Now, my father, I knew well that Chaka had doomed me to die, thoughfirst he would use me to destroy the princes. But I feared nothing,for I knew this also, that the hour of Chaka was come at last.

　　For a while I sat in my hut pondering, then when all men slept I aroseand crept like a snake by many paths to the hut of Dingaan the prince,who awaited me on that night. Following the shadow of the hut, I cameto the door and scratched upon it after a certain fashion. Presentlyit was opened, and I crawled in, and the door was shut again. Nowthere was a little light in the hut, and by its flame I saw the twoprinces sitting side by side, wrapped about with blankets which hungbefore their brows.

　　"Who is this that comes?" said the Prince Dingaan.

　　Then I lifted the blanket from my head so that they might see my face,and they also drew the blankets from their brows. I spoke, saying:"Hail to you, Princes, who to-morrow shall be dust! Hail to you, sonsof Senzangacona, who to-morrow shall be spirits!" and I pointedtowards them with my withered hand.

　　Now the princes were troubled, and shook with fear.

　　"What meanest thou, thou dog, that thou dost speak to us words of suchill-omen?" said the Prince Dingaan in a low voice.

　　"Where dost thou point at us with that white and withered hand ofthine, Wizard?" hissed the Prince Umhlangana.

　　"Have I not told you, O ye Princes!" I whispered, "that ye must strikeor die, and has not your heart failed you? Now hearken! Chaka hasdreamed another dream; now it is Chaka who strikes, and ye are alreadydead, ye children of Senzangacona."

　　"If the slayers of the king be without the gates, at least thou shaltdie first, thou who hast betrayed us!" quoth the Prince Dingaan, anddrew an assegai from under his kaross.

　　"First hear the king's dream, O Prince," I said; "then, if thou wilt,kill me, and die. Chaka the king slept and dreamed that he lay dead,and that one of you, the princes, wore his royal kaross."

　　"Who wore the royal kaross?" asked Dingaan, eagerly; and both lookedup, waiting on my words.

　　"The Prince Umhlangana wore it--in the dream of Chaka--O Dingaan,shoot of a royal stock!" I answered slowly, taking snuff as I spoke,and watching the two of them over the edge of my snuff-spoon.

　　Now Dingaan scowled heavily at Umhlangana; but the face of Umhlanganawas as the morning sky.

　　"Chaka dreamed this also," I went on: "that one of you, the princes,held his royal spear."

　　"Who held the royal spear?" asked Umhlangana.

　　"The Prince Dingaan held it--in the dream of Chaka--O Umhlangana,sprung from the root of kings!--and it dripped blood."

　　Now the face of Umhlangana grew dark as night, but that of Dingaanbrightened like the dawn.

　　"Chaka dreamed this also: that I, Mopo, your dog, who am not worthyto be mentioned with such names, came up and gave the royal salute,even the Bayete."

　　"To whom didst thou give the Bayete, O Mopo, son of Makedama?" askedboth of the princes as with one breath, waiting on my words.

　　"I gave it to both of you, O twin stars of the morning, princes of theZulu--in the dream of Chaka I gave it to both of you."

　　Now the princes looked this way and that, and were silent, not knowingwhat to say, for these princes hated each other, though adversity andfear had brought them to one bed.

　　"But what avails it to talk thus, ye lords of the land," I went on,"seeing that, both of you, ye are already as dead men, and thatvultures which are hungry to-night to-morrow shall be filled with meatof the best? Chaka the king is now a Doctor of Dreams, and to clearaway such a dream as this he has a purging medicine."

　　Now the brows of these brothers grew black indeed, for they saw thattheir fate was on them.

　　"These are the words of Chaka the king, O ye bulls who lead the herd!All are doomed, ye twain and I, and many another man who loves us. Inthe great kraal beyond the river there sits a regiment: it is summoned--and then--good-night! Have ye any words to say to those yet leftupon the earth? Perhaps it will be given to me to live a little whileafter ye are gone, and I may bring them to their ears."

　　"Can we not rise up now and fall upon Chaka?" asked Dingaan.

　　"It is not possible," I said; "the king is guarded."

　　"Hast thou no plan, Mopo?" groaned Umhlangana. "Methinks thou hast aplan to save us."

　　"And if I have a plan, ye Princes, what shall be my reward? It must begreat, for I am weary of life, and I will not use my wisdom for alittle thing."

　　Now both the princes offered me good things, each of them promisingmore than the other, as two young men who are rivals promise to thefather of a girl whom both would wed. I listened, saying always thatit was not enough, till in the end both of them swore by their heads,and by the bones of Senzangacona, their father, and by many otherthings, that I should be the first man in the land, after them, itskings, and should command the impis of the land, if I would but showthem a way to kill Chaka and become kings. Then, when they had doneswearing, I spoke, weighing my words:--

　　"In the great kraal beyond the river, O ye Princes, there sit, not oneregiment but two. One is named the Slayers and loves Chaka the king,who has done well by them, giving them cattle and wives. The other isnamed the Bees, and that regiment is hungry and longs for cattle andgirls; moreover, of that regiment the Prince Umhlangana is thegeneral, and it loves him. Now this is my plan--to summon the Bees inthe name of Umhlangana, not the Slayers in the name of Chaka. Bendforward, O Princes, that I may whisper in your ears."

　　So they bent forward, and I whispered awhile of the death of a king,and the sons of Senzangacona nodded their heads as one man in answer.Then I rose up, and crept from the hut as I had entered it, androusing certain trusty messengers, I dispatched them, running swiftlythrough the night.

　　CHAPTER XXI

　　THE DEATH OF CHAKA

　　Now, on the morrow, two hours before midday, Chaka came from the hutwhere he had sat through the night, and moved to a little kraalsurrounded by a fence that was some fifty paces distant from the hut.For it was my duty, day by day, to choose that place where the kingshould sit to hear the counsel of his indunas, and give judgment onthose whom he would kill, and to-day I had chosen this place. Chakawent alone from his hut to the kraal, and, for my own reasons, Iaccompanied him, walking after him. As we went the king glanced backat me over his shoulder, and said in a low voice:--

　　"Is all prepared, Mopo?"

　　"All is prepared, Black One," I answered. "The regiment of the Slayerswill be here by noon."

　　"Where are the princes, Mopo?" asked the king again.

　　"The princes sit with their wives in the houses of their women, OKing," I answered; "they drink beer and sleep in the laps of theirwives."

　　Chaka smiled grimly, "For the last time, Mopo!"

　　"For the last time, O King."

　　We came to the kraal, and Chaka sat down in the shade of the reedfence, upon an ox-hide that was brayed soft. Near to him stood a girlholding a gourd of beer; there were also present the old chiefInguazonca, brother of Unandi, Mother of the Heavens, and the chiefUmxamama, whom Chaka loved. When we had sat a little while in thekraal, certain men came in bearing cranes' feathers, which the kinghad sent them to gather a month's journey from the kraal Duguza, andthey were admitted before the king. These men had been away long upontheir errand, and Chaka was angry with them. Now the leader of the menwas an old captain of Chaka's, who had fought under him in manybattles, but whose service was done, because his right hand had beenshorn away by the blow of an axe. He was a great man and very brave.

　　Chaka asked the man why he had been so long in finding the feathers,and he answered that the birds had flown from that part of the countrywhither he was sent, and he must wait there till they returned, thathe might snare them.

　　"Thou shouldst have followed the cranes, yes, if they flew through thesunset, thou disobedient dog!" said the king. "Let him be taken away,and all those who were with him."

　　Now some of the men prayed a little for mercy, but the captain did butsalute the king, calling him "Father," and craving a boon before hedied.

　　"What wouldst thou?" asked Chaka.

　　"My father," said the man, "I would ask thee two things. I have foughtmany times at thy side in battle while we both were young; nor did Iever turn my back upon the foe. The blow that shore the hand from offthis arm was aimed at thy head, O King; I stayed it with my naked arm.It is nothing; at thy will I live, and at thy will I die. Who am Ithat I should question the word of the king? Yet I would ask this,that thou wilt withdraw the kaross from about thee, O King, that forthe last time my eyes may feast themselves upon the body of him whom,above all men, I love."

　　"Thou art long-winded," said the king, "what more?"

　　"This, my father, that I may bid farewell to my son; he is a littlechild, so high, O King," and he held his hand above his knee.

　　"Thy first boon is granted," said the king, slipping the kaross fromhis shoulders and showing the great breast beneath. "For the second itshall be granted also, for I will not willingly divide the father andthe son. Bring the boy here; thou shalt bid him farewell, then thoushalt slay him with thine own hand ere thou thyself art slain; it willbe good sport to see."

　　Now the man turned grey beneath the blackness of his skin, andtrembled a little as he murmured, "The king's will is the will of hisservant; let the child be brought."

　　But I looked at Chaka and saw that the tears were running down hisface, and that he only spoke thus to try the captain who loved him tothe last.

　　"Let the man go," said the king, "him and those with him."

　　So they went glad at heart, and praising the king.

　　I have told you this, my father, though it has not to do with mystory, because then, and then only, did I ever see Chaka show mercy toone whom he had doomed to die.

　　As the captain and his people left the gate of the kraal, it wasspoken in the ear of the king that a man sought audience with him. Hewas admitted crawling on his knees. I looked and saw that this wasthat Masilo whom Chaka had charged with a message to him who was namedBulalio, or the Slaughterer, and who ruled over the People of the Axe.It was Masilo indeed, but he was no longer fat, for much travel hadmade him thin; moreover, on his back were the marks of rods, as yetscarcely healed over.

　　"Who art thou?" said Chaka.

　　"I am Masilo, of the People of the Axe, to whom command was given torun with a message to Bulalio the Slaughterer, their chief, and toreturn on the thirtieth day. Behold, O King, I have returned, thoughin a sorry plight!"

　　"It seems so!" said the king, laughing aloud. "I remember now: speakon, Masilo the Thin, who wast Masilo the Fat; what of thisSlaughterer? Does he come with his people to lay the axe Groan-Makerin my hands?"

　　"Nay, O King, he comes not. He met me with scorn, and with scorn hedrove me from his kraal. Moreover, as I went I was seized by theservants of Zinita, she whom I wooed, but who is now the wife of theSlaughterer, and laid on my face upon the ground and beaten cruellywhile Zinita numbered the strokes."

　　"Hah!" said the king. "And what were the words of this puppy?"

　　"These were his words, O King: 'Bulalio the Slaughterer, who sitsbeneath the shadow of the Witch Mountain, to Bulalio the Slaughtererwho sits in the kraal Duguza--To thee I pay no tribute; if thouwouldst have the axe Groan-Maker, come to the Ghost Mountain and takeit. This I promise thee: thou shalt look on a face thou knowest, forthere is one there who would be avenged for the blood of a certainMopo.'"

　　Now, while Masilo told this tale I had seen two things--first, that alittle piece of stick was thrust through the straw of the fence, and,secondly, that the regiment of the Bees was swarming on the slopeopposite to the kraal in obedience to the summons I had sent them inthe name of Umhlangana. The stick told me that the princes were hiddenbehind the fence waiting the signal, and the coming of the regimentthat it was time to do the deed.

　　When Masilo had spoken Chaka sprang up in fury. His eyes rolled, hisface worked, foam flew from his lips, for such words as these hadnever offended his ears since he was king, and Masilo knew him little,else he had not dared to utter them.

　　For a while he gasped, shaking his small spear, for at first he couldnot speak. At length he found words:--

　　"The dog," he hissed, "the dog who dares thus to spit in my face!Hearken all! As with my last breath I command that this Slaughterer betorn limb from limb, he and all his tribe! And thou, thou darest tobring me this talk from a skunk of the mountains. And thou, too, Mopo,thy name is named in it. Well, of thee presently. Ho! Umxamama, myservant, slay me this slave of a messenger, beat out his brains withthy stick. Swift! swift!"

　　Now, the old chief Umxamama sprang up to do the king's bidding, but hewas feeble with age, and the end of it was that Masilo, being mad withfear, killed Umxamama, not Umxamama Masilo. Then Inguazonca, brotherof Unandi, Mother of the Heavens, fell upon Masilo and ended him, butwas hurt himself in so doing. Now I looked at Chaka, who stood shakingthe little red spear, and thought swiftly, for the hour had come.

　　"Help!" I cried, "one is slaying the King!"

　　As I spoke the reed fence burst asunder, and through it plunged theprinces Umhlangana and Dingaan, as bulls plunge through a brake.

　　Then I pointed to Chaka with my withered hand, saying, "Behold yourking!"

　　Now, from beneath the shelter of his kaross, each Prince drew out ashort stabbing spear, and plunged it into the body of Chaka the king.Umhlangana smote him on the left shoulder, Dingaan struck him in theright side. Chaka dropped the little spear handled with the red woodand looked round, and so royally that the princes, his brothers, grewafraid and shrank away from him.

　　Twice he looked on each; then he spoke, saying: "What! do you slay me,my brothers--dogs of mine own house, whom I have fed? Do you slay me,thinking to possess the land and to rule it? I tell you it shall notbe for long. I hear a sound of running feet--the feet of a great whitepeople. They shall stamp you flat, children of my father! They shallrule the land that I have won, and you and your people shall be theirslaves!"

　　Thus Chaka spoke while the blood ran down him to the ground, and againhe looked on them royally, like a buck at gaze.

　　"Make an end, O ye who would be kings!" I cried; but their hearts hadturned to water and they could not. Then I, Mopo, sprang forward andpicked from the ground that little assegai handled with the royal wood--the same assegai with which Chaka had murdered Unandi, his mother,and Moosa, my son, and lifted it on high, and while I lifted it, myfather, once more, as when I was young, a red veil seemed to wavebefore my eyes.

　　"Wherefore wouldst thou kill me, Mopo?" said the king.

　　"For the sake of Baleka, my sister, to whom I swore the deed, and ofall my kin," I cried, and plunged the spear through him. He sank downupon the tanned ox-hide, and lay there dying. Once more he spoke, andonce only, saying: "Would now that I had hearkened to the voice ofNobela, who warned me against thee, thou dog!"

　　Then he was silent for ever. But I knelt over him and called in hisear the names of all those of my blood who had died at his hands--thenames of Makedama, my father, of my mother, of Anadi my wife, of Moosamy son, and all my other wives and children, and of Baleka my sister.His eyes and ears were open, and I think, my father, that he saw andunderstood; I think also that the hate upon my face as I shook mywithered hand before him was more fearful to him that the pain ofdeath. At the least, he turned his head aside, shut his eyes, andgroaned. Presently they opened again, and he was dead.

　　Thus then, my father, did Chaka the King, the greatest man who hasever lived in Zululand, and the most evil, pass by my hand to thosekraals of the Inkosazana where no sleep is. In blood he died as he hadlived in blood, for the climber at last falls with the tree, and inthe end the swimmer is borne away by the stream. Now he trod that pathwhich had been beaten flat for him by the feet of people whom he hadslaughtered, many as the blades of grass upon a mountain-side; but itis a lie to say, as some do, that he died a coward, praying for mercy.Chaka died, as he had lived, a brave man. Ou! my father, I know it,for these eyes saw it and this hand let out his life.

　　Now he was dead and the regiment of the Bees drew near, nor could Iknow how they would take this matter, for, though the PrinceUmhlangana was their general, yet all the soldiers loved the king,because he had no equal in battle, and when he gave he gave with anopen hand. I looked round; the princes stood like men amazed; the girlhad fled; the chief Umxamama was dead at the hands of dead Masilo; andthe old chief Inguazonca, who had killed Masilo, stood by, hurt andwondering; there were no others in the kraal.

　　"Awake, ye kings," I cried to the brothers, "the impi is at the gates!Swift, now stab that man!"--and I pointed to the old chief--"and leavethe matter to my wit."

　　Then Dingaan roused himself, and springing upon Inguazonca, thebrother of Unandi, smote him a great blow with his spear, so that hesank down dead without a word. Then again the princes stood silent andamazed.

　　"This one will tell no tales," I cried, pointing at the fallen chief.

　　Now a rumour of the slaying had got abroad among the women, who hadheard cries and seen the flashing of spears above the fence, and fromthe women it had come to the regiment of the Bees, who advanced to thegates of the kraal singing. Then of a sudden they ceased their singingand rushed towards the hut in front of which we stood.

　　Then I ran to meet them, uttering cries of woe, holding in my hand thelittle assegai of the king red with the king's blood, and spoke withthe captain's in the gate, saying:--

　　"Lament, ye captains and ye soldiers, weep and lament, for your fatheris no more! He who nursed you is no more! The king is dead! now earthand heaven will come together, for the king is dead!"

　　"How so, Mopo?" cried the leader of the Bees. "How is our fatherdead?"

　　"He is dead by the hand of a wicked wanderer named Masilo, who, whenhe was doomed to die by the king, snatched this assegai from theking's hand and stabbed him; and afterwards, before he could be cutdown himself by us three, the princes and myself, he killed the chiefsInguazonca and Umxamama also. Draw near and look on him who was theking; it is the command of Dingaan and Umhlangana, the kings, that youdraw near and look on him who was the king, that his death at the handof Masilo may be told through all the land."

　　"You are better at making of kings, Mopo, than at the saving of onewho was your king from the stroke of a wanderer," said the leader ofthe Bees, looking at me doubtfully.

　　But his words passed unheeded, for some of the captains went forwardto look on the Great One who was dead, and some, together with most ofthe soldiers, ran this way and that, crying in their fear that now theheaven and earth would come together, and the race of man would ceaseto be, because Chaka, the king, was dead.

　　Now, my father, how shall I, whose days are few, tell you of all thematters that happened after the dead of Chaka? Were I to speak of themall they would fill many books of the white men, and, perhaps, some ofthem are written down there. For this reason it is, that I may bebrief, I have only spoken of a few of those events which befell in thereign of Chaka; for my tale is not of the reign of Chaka, but of thelives of a handful of people who lived in those days, and of whom Iand Umslopogaas alone are left alive--if, indeed, Umslopogaas, the sonof Chaka, is still living on the earth. Therefore, in a few words Iwill pass over all that came about after the fall of Chaka and till Iwas sent down by Dingaan, the king, to summon him to surrender to theking who was called the Slaughterer and who ruled the People of theAxe. Ah! would that I had known for certain that this was none otherthan Umslopogaas, for then had Dingaan gone the way that Chaka wentand which Umhlangana followed, and Umslopogaas ruled the people of theZulus as their king. But, alas! my wisdom failed me. I paid no heed tothe voice of my heart which told me that this was Umslopogaas who sentthe message to Chaka threatening vengeance for one Mopo, and I knewnothing till too late; surely, I thought, the man spoke of some otherMopo. For thus, my father, does destiny make fools of us men. We thinkthat we can shape our fate, but it is fate that shapes us, and nothingbefalls except fate will it. All things are a great pattern, myfather, drawn by the hand of the Umkulunkulu upon the cup whence hedrinks the water of his wisdom; and our lives, and what we do, andwhat we do not do, are but a little bit of the pattern, which is sobig that only the eyes of Him who is above, the Umkulunkulu, can seeit all. Even Chaka, the slayer of men, and all those he slew, are butas a tiny grain of dust in the greatness of that pattern. How, then,can we be wise, my father, who are but the tools of wisdom? how can bebuild who are but pebbles in a wall? how can we give life who arebabes in the womb of fate? or how can we slay who are but spears inthe hands of the slayer?

　　This came about, my father. Matters were made straight in the landafter the death of Chaka. At first people said that Masilo, thestranger, had stabbed the king; then it was known that Mopo, the wiseman, the doctor and the body-servant of the king, had slain the king,and that the two great bulls, his brothers Umhlangana and Dingaan,children of Senzangacona, had also lifted spears against him. But hewas dead, and earth and heaven had not come together, so what did itmatter? Moreover, the two new kings promised to deal gently with thepeople, and to lighten the heavy yoke of Chaka, and men in a bad caseare always ready to home for a better. So it came about that the onlyenemies the princes found were each other and Engwade, the son ofUnandi, Chaka's half-brother. But I, Mopo, who was now the first manin the land after the kings, ceasing to be a doctor and becoming ageneral, went up against Engwade with the regiment of the Bees and theregiment of the Slayers and smote him in his kraals. It was a hardfight, but in the end I destroyed him and all his people: Engwadekilled eight men with his own hand before I slew him. Then I came backto the kraal with the few that were left alive of the two regiments.

　　After that the two kings quarrelled more and more, and I weighed themboth in my balance, for I would know which was the most favourable tome. In the end I found that both feared me, but that Umhlangana wouldcertainly put me to death if he gained the upper hand, whereas thiswas not yet in the mind of Dingaan. So I pressed down the balance ofUmhlangana and raised that of Dingaan, sending the fears of Umhlanganato sleep till I could cause his hut to be surrounded. Then Umhlanganafollowed upon the road of Chaka his brother, the road of the assegai;and Dingaan ruled alone for awhile. Such are the things that befallprinces of this earth, my father. See, I am but a little man, and mylot is humble at the last, yet I have brought about the death of threeof them, and of these two died by my hand.

　　It was fourteen days after the passing away of the Prince Umhlanganathat the great army came back in a sorry plight from the marshes ofthe Limpopo, for half of them were left dead of fever and the might ofthe foe, and the rest were starving. It was well for them who yetlived that Chaka was no more, else they had joined their brethren whowere dead on the way; since never before for many years had a Zuluimpi returned unvictorious and without a single head of cattle. Thusit came about that they were glad enough to welcome a king who sparedtheir lives, and thenceforth, till his fate found him, Dingaan reignedunquestioned.

　　Now, Dingaan wa a prince of the blood of Chaka indeed; for, likeChaka, he was great in presence and cruel at heart, but he had not themight and the mind of Chaka. Moreover, he was treacherous and a liar,and these Chaka was not. Also, he loved women much, and spent withthem the time that he should have given to matters of the State. Yethe reigned awhile in the land. I must tell this also; that Dingaanwould have killed Panda, his half-brother, so that the house ofSenzangacona, his father, might be swept out clean. Now Panda was aman of gentle heart, who did not love war, and therefore it wasthought that he was half-witted; and, because I loved Panda, when thequestion of his slaying came on, I and the chief Mapita spoke againstit, and pleaded for him, saying that there was nothing to be feared athis hands who was a fool. So in the end Dingaan gave way, saying,"Well, you ask me to spare this dog, and I will spare him, but one dayhe will bite me."

　　So Panda was made governor of the king's cattle. Yet in the end thewords of Dingaan came true, for it was the grip of Panda's teeth thatpulled him from the throne; only, if Panda was the dog that bit, I,Mopo, was the man who set him on the hunt.

　　CHAPTER XXII

　　MOPO GOES TO SEEK THE SLAUGHTERER

　　Now Dingaan, deserting the kraal Duguza, moved back to Zululand, andbuilt a great kraal by the Mahlabatine, which he named "Umgugundhlovu"--that is, "the rumbling of the elephant." Also, he caused all thefairest girls in the land to be sought out as his wives, and thoughmany were found yet he craved for more. And at this time a rumour cameto the ears of the King Dingaan that there lived in Swaziland amongthe Halakazi tribe a girl of the most wonderful beauty, who was namedthe Lily, and whose skin was whiter than are the skins of our people,and he desired greatly to have this girl to wife. So Dingaan sent anembassy to the chief of the Halakazi, demanding that the girl shouldbe given to him. At the end of a month the embassy returned again, andtold the king that they had found nothing but hard words at the kraalof the Halakazi, and had been driven thence with scorn and blows.

　　This was the message of the chief of the Halakazi to Dingaan, king ofthe Zulus: That the maid who was named the Lily, was, indeed, thewonder of the earth, and as yet unwed; for she had found no man uponwhom she looked with favour, and she was held in such love by thispeople that it was not their wish to force any husband on her.Moreover, the chief said that he and his people defied Dingaan and theZulus, as their fathers had defied Chaka before him, and spat upon hisname, and that no maid of theirs should go to be the wife of a Zuludog.

　　Then the chief of the Halakazi caused the maid who was named the Lilyto be led before the messengers of Dingaan, and they found herwonderfully fair, for so they said: she was tall as a reed, and hergrace was the grace of a reed that is shaken in the wind. Moreover,her hair curled, and hung upon her shoulders, her eyes were large andbrown, and soft as a buck's, her colour was the colour of rich cream,her smile was like a ripple on the waters, and when she spoke hervoice was low and sweeter than the sound of an instrument of music.They said also that the girl wished to speak with them, but the chiefforbade it, and caused her to be led thence with all honour.

　　Now, when Dingaan heard this message he grew mad as a lion in a net,for he desired this maid above everything, and yet he who had allthings could not win the maid. This was his command, that a great impishould be gathered and sent to Swaziland against the Halakazi tribe,to destroy them and seize the maid. But when the matter came on to bediscussed with the indunas in the presence of the king, at theAmapakati or council, I, as chief of the indunas, spoke against it,saying that the tribe of the Halakazi were great and strong, and thatwar with them would mean war with the Swazis also; moreover, they hadtheir dwelling in caves which were had to win. Also, I said, that thiswas no time to send impis to seek a single girl, for few years hadgone by since the Black One fell; and foes were many, and the soldiersof the land had waxed few with slaughter, half of them having perishedin the marshes of the Limpopo. Now, time must be given them to grow upagain, for to-day they were as a little child, or like a man wastedwith hunger. Maids were many, let the king take them and satisfy hisheart, but let him make no war for this one.

　　Thus I spoke boldly in the face of the king, as none had dared tospeak before Chaka; and courage passed from me to the hearts of theother indunas and generals, and they echoed my words, for they knewthat, of all follies, to begin a new war with the Swazi people wouldbe the greatest.

　　Dingaan listened, and his brow grew dark, yet he was not so firmlyseated on the throne that he dared put away our words, for still therewere many in the land who loved the memory of Chaka, and rememberedthat Dingaan had murdered him and Umhlangana also. For now that Chakawas dead, people forgot how evilly he had dealt with them, andremembered only that he was a great man, who had made the Zulu peopleout of nothing, as a smith fashions a bright spear from a lump ofiron. Also, though they had changed masters, yet their burden was notlessened, for, as Chaka slew, so Dingaan slew also, and as Chakaoppressed, so did Dingaan oppress. Therefore Dingaan yielded to thevoice of his indunas and no impi was sent against the Halakazi to seekthe maid that was named the Lily. But still he hankered for her in hisheart, and from that hour he hated me because I had crossed his willand robbed him of his desire.

　　Now, my father, there is this to be told: though I did not know itthen, the maid who was named the Lily was no other than my daughterNada. The thought, indeed, came into my mind, that none but Nada couldbe so fair. Yet I knew for certain that Nada and her mother Macrophawere dead, for he who brought me the news of their death had seentheir bodies locked in each other's arms, killed, as it were, by thesame spear. Yet, as it chanced, he was wrong; for though Macrophaindeed was killed, it was another maid who lay in blood beside her;for the people whither I had sent Macropha and Nada were tributary tothe Halakazi tribe, and that chief of the Halakazi who sat in theplace of Galazi the Wolf had quarrelled with them, and fallen on themby night and eaten them up.

　　As I learned afterwards, the cause of their destruction, as in laterdays it was the cause of the slaying of the Halakazi, was the beautyof Nada and nothing else, for the fame of her loveliness had goneabout the land, and the old chief of the Halakazi had commanded thatthe girl should be sent to his kraal to live there, that her beautymight shine upon his place like the sun, and that, if so she willed,she should choose a husband from the great men of the Halakazi. Butthe headmen of the kraal refused, for none who had looked on her wouldsuffer their eyes to lose sight of Nada the Lily, though there wasthis fate about the maid that none strove to wed her against her will.Many, indeed, asked her in marriage, both there and among the Halakazipeople, but ever she shook her head and said, "Nay, I would wed noman," and it was enough.

　　For it was the saying among men, that it was better that she shouldremain unmarried, and all should look on her, than that she shouldpass from their sight into the house of a husband; since they heldthat her beauty was given to be a joy to all, like the beauty of thedawn and of the evening. Yet this beauty of Nada's was a dreadfulthing, and the mother of much death, as shall be told; and because ofher beauty and the great love she bore, she, the Lily herself, mustwither, and the cup of my sorrows must be filled to overflowing, andthe heart of Umslopogaas the Slaughterer, son of Chaka the king, mustbecome desolate as the black plain when fire has swept it. So it wasordained, my father, and so it befell, seeing that thus all men, whiteand black, seek that which is beautiful, and when at last they findit, then it passes swiftly away, or, perchance, it is their death. Forgreat joy and great beauty are winged, nor will they sojourn long uponthe earth. They come down like eagles out of the sky, and into the skythey return again swiftly.

　　Thus then it came about, my father, that I, Mopo, believing mydaughter Nada to be dead, little guessed that it was she who was namedthe Lily in the kraals of the Halakazi, and whom Dingaan the kingdesired for a wife.

　　Now after I had thwarted him in this matter of the sending of an impito pluck the Lily from the gardens of the Halakazi, Dingaan learned tohate me. Also I was in his secrets, and with me he had killed hisbrother Chaka and his brother Umhlangana, and it was I who held himback from the slaying of his brother Panda also; and, therefore, hehated me, as is the fashion of small-hearted men with those who havelifted them up. Yet he did not dare to do away with me, for my voicewas loud in the land, and when I spoke the people listened. Therefore,in the end, he cast about for some way to be rid of me for a while,till he should grow strong enough to kill me.

　　"Mopo," said the king to me one day as I sat before him in councilwith others of the indunas and generals, "mindest thou of the lastwords of the Great Elephant, who is dead?" This he said meaning Chakahis brother, only he did not name him, for now the name of Chaka wasblonipa in the land, as is the custom with the names of dead kings--that is, my father, it was not lawful that it should pass the lips.

　　"I remember the words, O King," I answered. "They were ominous words,for this was their burden: that you and your house should not sit longin the throne of kings, but that the white men should take away yourroyalty and divide your territories. Such was the prophecy of the Lionof the Zulu, why speak of it? Once before I heard him prophecy, andhis words were fulfilled. May the omen be an egg without meat; may itnever become fledged; may that bird never perch upon your roof, OKing!"

　　Now Dingaan trembled with fear, for the words of Chaka were in hismind by night and by day; then he grew angry and bit his lip,saying:--

　　"Thou fool, Mopo! canst thou not hear a raven croak at the gates of akraal but thou must needs go tell those who dwell within that he waitsto pick their eyes? Such criers of ill to come may well find ill athand, Mopo." He ceased, looked on me threateningly awhile, and wenton: "I did not speak of those words rolling by chance from a tonguehalf loosed by death, but of others that told of a certain Bulalio, ofa Slaughterer who rules the People of the Axe and dwells beneath theshadow of the Ghost Mountain far away to the north yonder. Surely Iheard them all as I sat beneath the shade of the reed-fence beforeever I came to save him who was my brother from the spear of Masilo,the murderer, whose spear stole away the life of a king?"

　　"I remember those words also, O King!" I said. "Is it the will of theking that an impi should be gathered to eat up this upstart? Such wasthe command of the one who is gone, given, as it were, with his lastbreath."

　　"Nay, Mopo, that is not my will. If no impi can be found by thee towipe away the Halakazi and bring one whom I desire to delight my eyes,then surely none can be found to eat up this Slaughterer and hispeople. Moreover, Bulalio, chief of the People of the Axe, has notoffended against me, but against an elephant whose trumpetings aredone. Now this is my will, Mopo, my servant: that thou shouldst takewith thee a few men only and go gently to this Bulalio, and say tohim: 'A greater Elephant stalks through the land than he who has goneto sleep, and it has come to his ears--that thou, Chief of the Peopleof the Axe, dost pay no tribute, and hast said that, because of thedeath of a certain Mopo, thou wilt have nothing to do with him whoseshadow lies upon the land. Now one Mopo is sent to thee, Slaughterer,to know if this tale is true, for, if it be true, then shalt thoulearn the weight of the hoof of that Elephant who trumpets in thekraal of Umgugundhlovu. Think, then, and weigh thy words before thoudost answer, Slaughterer.'"

　　Now I, Mopo, heard the commands of the king and pondered them in mymind, for I knew well that it was the design of Dingaan to be rid ofme for a space that he might find time to plot my overthrow, and thathe cared little for this matter of a petty chief, who, living faraway, had dared to defy Chaka. Yet I wished to go, for there hadarisen in me a great desire to see this Bulalio, who spoke ofvengeance to be taken for one Mopo, and whose deeds were such as thedeeds of Umslopogaas would have been, had Umslopogaas lived to lookupon the light. Therefore I answered:--

　　"I hear the king. The king's word shall be done, though, O King, thousendest a big man upon a little errand."

　　"Not so, Mopo," answered Dingaan. "My heart tells me that this chickenof a Slaughterer will grow to a great cock if his comb is not cutpresently; and thou, Mopo, art versed in cutting combs, even of thetallest."

　　"I hear the king," I answered again.

　　So, my father, it came about that on the morrow, taking with me butten chosen men, I, Mopo, started on my journey towards the GhostMountain, and as I journeyed I thought much of how I had trod thatpath in bygone days. Then, Macropha, my wife, and Nada, my daughter,and Umslopogaas, the son of Chaka, who was thought to be my son,walked at my side. Now, as I imagined, all were dead and I walkedalone; doubtless I also should soon be dead. Well, people lived fewdays and evil in those times, and what did it matter? At the least Ihad wreaked vengeance on Chaka and satisfied my heart.

　　At length I came one night to that lonely spot where we had camped inthe evil hour when Umslopogaas was borne away by the lioness, and oncemore I looked upon the cave whence he had dragged the cub, and uponthe awful face of the stone Witch who sits aloft upon the GhostMountain forever and forever. I could sleep little that night, becauseof the sorrow at my heart, but sat awake looking, in the brightness ofthe moon, upon the grey face of the stone Witch, and on the depths ofthe forest that grew about her knees, wondering the while if the bonesof Umslopogaas lay broken in that forest. Now as I journeyed, manytales had been told to me of this Ghost Mountain, which all swore washaunted, so said some, by men in the shape of wolves; and so saidsome, by the Esemkofu--that is, by men who have died and who have beenbrought back again by magic. They have no tongues, the Esemkofu, forhad they tongues they would cry aloud to mortals the awful secrets ofthe dead, therefore, they can but utter a wailing like that of a babe.Surely one may hear them in the forests at night as they wail "Ai!--ah! Ai--ah!" among the silent trees!

　　You laugh, my father, but I did not laugh as I thought of these tales;for, if men have spirits, where do the spirits go when the body isdead? They must go somewhere, and would it be strange that they shouldreturn to look upon the lands where they were born? Yet I neverthought much of such matters, though I am a doctor, and know somethingof the ways of the Amatongo, the people of the ghosts. To speak truth,my father, I have had so much to do with the loosing of the spirits ofmen that I never troubled myself overmuch with them after they wereloosed; there will be time to do this when I myself am of theirnumber.

　　So I sat and gazed on the mountain and the forest that grew over itlike hair on the head of a woman, and as I gazed I heard a sound thatcame from far away, out of the heart of the forest as it seemed. Atfirst it was faint and far off, a distant thing like the cry ofchildren in a kraal across a valley; then it grew louder, but still Icould not say what it might be; now it swelled and swelled, and I knewit--it was the sound of wild beats at chase. Nearer came the music,the rocks rang with it, and its voice set the blood beating but tohearken to it. That pack was great which ran a-hunting through thesilent night; and now it was night, on the other side of the slopeonly, and the sound swelled so loud that those who were with me awokealso and looked forth. Now of a sudden a great koodoo bull appearedfor an instant standing out against the sky on the crest of the ridge,then vanished in the shadow. He was running towards us; presently wesaw him again speeding on his path with great bounds. We saw this also--forms grey and gaunt and galloping, in number countless, that leapedalong his path, appearing on the crest of the rise, disappearing intothe shadow, seen again on the slope, lost in the valley; and with themtwo other shapes, the shapes of men.

　　Now the big buck bounded past us not half a spear's throw away, andbehind him streamed the countless wolves, and from the throats of thewolves went up that awful music. And who were these two that came withthe wolves, shapes of men great and strong? They ran silently andswift, wolves' teeth gleamed upon their heads, wolves' hides hungabout their shoulders. In the hands of one was an axe--the moonlightshone upon it--in the hand of the other a heavy club. Neck and neckthey ran; never before had we seen men travel so fast. See! they speddown the slope towards us; the wolves were left behind, all exceptfour of them; we heard the beating of their feet; they came, theypassed, they were gone, and with them their unnumbered company. Themusic grew faint, it died, it was dead; the hunt was far away, and thenight was still again!

　　"Now, my brethren," I asked of those who were with me, "what is thisthat we have seen?"

　　Then one answered, "We have seen the Ghosts who live in the lap of theold Witch, and those men are the Wolf-Brethren, the wizards who arekings of the Ghosts."

　　CHAPTER XXIII

　　MOPO REVEALS HIMSELF TO THE SLAUGHTERER

　　All that night we watched, but we neither saw nor heard any more ofthe wolves, nor of the men who hunted with them. On the morrow, atdawn, I sent a runner to Bulalio, chief of the People of the Axe,saying that a messenger came to him from Dingaan, the king, whodesired to speak with him in peace within the gates of his kraal. Icharged the messenger, however, that he should not tell my name, butshould say only that it was "Mouth of Dingaan." Then I and those withme followed slowly on the path of the man whom I sent forward, for theway was still far, and I had bidden him return and meet me bearing thewords of the Slaughterer, Holder of the Axe.

　　All that day till the sun grew low we talked round the base of thegreat Ghost Mountain, following the line of the river. We met no one,but once we came to the ruins of a kraal, and in it lay the brokenbones of many men, and with the bones rusty assegais and the remainsof ox-hide shields, black and white in colour. Now I examined theshields, and knew from their colour that they had been carried in thehands of those soldiers who, years ago, were sent out by Chaka to seekfor Umslopogaas, but who had returned no more.

　　"Now," I said, "it has fared ill with those soldiers of the Black Onewho is gone, for I think that these are the shields they bore, andthat their eyes once looked upon the world through the holes in yonderskulls."

　　"These are the shields they bore, and those are the skulls they wore,"answered one. "See, Mopo, son of Makedama, this is no man's work thathas brought them to their death. Men do not break the bones of theirfoes in pieces as these bones are broken. Wow! men do not break them,but wolves do, and last night we saw wolves a-hunting; nor did theyhunt alone, Mopo. Wow! this is a haunted land!"

　　Then we went on in silence, and all the way the stone face of theWitch who sits aloft forever stared down on us from the mountain top.At length, an hour before sundown, we came to the open lands, andthere, on the crest of a rise beyond the river, we saw the kraal ofthe People of the Axe. It was a great kraal and well built, and theircattle were spread about the plains like to herds of game for number.We went to the river and passed it by the ford, then sat down andwaited, till presently I saw the man whom I had sent forward returningtowards us. He came and saluted me, and I asked him for news.

　　"This is my news, Mopo," he said: "I have seen him who is namedBulalio, and he is a great man--long and lean, with a fierce face, andcarrying a mighty axe, such an axe as he bore last night who huntedwith the wolves. When I had been led before the chief I saluted himand spoke to him--the words you laid upon my tongue I told to him. Helistened, then laughed aloud, and said: 'Tell him who sent you thatthe mouth of Dingaan shall be welcome, and shall speak the words ofDingaan in peace; yet I would that it were the head of Dingaan thatcame and not his mouth only, for then Axe Groan-Maker would join inour talk--ay, because of one Mopo, whom his brother Chaka murdered, itwould also speak with Dingaan. Still, the mouth is not the head, sothe mouth may come in peace.'"

　　Now I started when for the second time I heard talk of one Mopo, whosename had been on the lips of Bulalio the Slaughterer. Who was therethat would thus have loved Mopo except one who was long dead? And yet,perhaps the chief spoke of some other Mopo, for the name was not myown only--in truth, Chaka had killed a chief of that name at the greatmourning, because he said that two Mopos in the land were one toomany, and that though this Mopo wept sorely when the tears of otherswere dry. So I said only that this Bulalio had a high stomach, and wewent on to the gates of the kraal.

　　There were none to meet us at the gates, and none stood by the doorsof the huts within them, but beyond, from the cattle kraal that was inthe centre of the huts, rose a dust and a din as of men gathering forwar. Now some of those were with me were afraid, and would have turnedback, fearing treachery, and they were yet more afraid when, on comingto the inner entrance of the cattle kraal, we saw some five hundredsoldiers being mustered there company by company, by two great men,

　　who ran up and down the ranks shouting.

　　But I cried, "Nay! nay! Turn not back! Bold looks melt the hearts offoes. Moreover, if this Bulalio would have murdered us, there was noneed for him to call up so many of his warriors. He is a proud chief,and would show his might, not knowing that the king we serve canmuster a company for every man he has. Let us go on boldly."

　　So we walked forward towards the impi that was gathered on the furtherside of the kraal. Now the two great men who were marshalling thesoldiers saw us, and came to meet us, one following the other. He whocame first bore the axe upon his shoulder, and he who followed swung ahuge club. I looked upon the foremost of them, and ah! my father, myheart grew faint with joy, for I knew him across the years. It wasUmslopogaas! my fosterling, Umslopogaas! and none other, now growninto manhood--ay, into such a man as was not to be found beside him inZululand. He was great and fierce, somewhat spare in frame, but wideshouldered and shallow flanked. His arms were long and not over big,but the muscles stood out on them like knots in a rope; his legs werelong also, and very thick beneath the knee. His eye was like aneagle's, his nose somewhat hooked, and he held his head a littleforward, as a man who searches continually for a hidden foe. He seemedto walk slowly, and yet he came swiftly, but with a gliding movementlike that of a wolf or a lion, and always his fingers played round thehorn handle of the axe Groan-Maker. As for him who followed, he wasgreat also, shorter than Umslopogaas by the half of a head, but of asturdier build. His eyes were small, and twinkled unceasingly likelittle stars, and his look was very wild, for now and again hegrinned, showing his white teeth.

　　When I saw Umslopogaas, my father, my bowels melted within me, and Ilonged to run to him and throw myself upon his neck. Yet I tookcouncil with myself and did not--nay, I dropped the corner of thekaross I wrote over my eyes, hiding my face lest he should know me.Presently he stood before me, searching me out with his keen eyes, forI drew forward to greet him.

　　"Greeting, Mouth of Dingaan!" he said in a loud voice. "You are alittle man to be the mouth of so big a chief."

　　"The mouth is a little member, even of the body of a great king, OChief Bulalio, ruler of the People of the Axe, wizard of the wolvesthat are upon the Ghost Mountain, who aforetime was named Umslopogaas,son of Mopo, son of Makedama."

　　Now when Umslopogaas heard these words he started like a child at arustling in the dark and stared hard at me.

　　"You are well instructed," he said.

　　"The ears of the king are large, if his mouth be small, O ChiefBulalio," I answered, "and I, who am but the mouth, speak what theears have heard."

　　"How know you that I have dwelt with the wolves upon the GhostMountain, O Mouth?" he asked.

　　"The eyes of the king see far, O Chief Bulalio. Thus last night theysaw a great chase and a merry. It seems that they saw a koodoo bullrunning at speed, and after him countless wolves making their music,and with the wolves two men clad in wolves' skins, such men as you,Bulalio, and he with the club who follows you."

　　Now Umslopogaas lifted the axe Groan-Maker as though he would cut medown, then let it fall again, while Galazi the Wolf glared at me withwide-opened eyes.

　　"How know you that once I was named Umslopogaas, who have lost thatname these many days? Speak, O Mouth, lest I kill you."

　　"Slay if you will, Umslopogaas," I answered, "but know that when thebrains are scattered the mouth is dumb. He who scatters brains loseswisdom."

　　"Answer!" he said.

　　"I answer not. Who are you that I should answer you? I know; it isenough. To my business."

　　Now Umslopogaas ground his teeth in anger. "I am not wont to bethwarted here in my own kraal," he said; "but do your business. Speakit, little Mouth."

　　"This is my business, little Chief. When the Black One who is gone yetlived, you sent him a message by one Masilo--such a message as hisears had never heard, and that had been your death, O fool puffed upwith pride, but death came first upon the Black One, and his hand wasstayed. Now Dingaan, whose shadow lies upon the land, the king whom Iserve, and who sits in the place of the Black One who is gone, speaksto you by me, his mouth. He would know this: if it is true that yourefuse to own his sovereignty, to pay tribute to him in men and maidsand cattle, and to serve him in his wars? Answer, you little headman!--answer in few words and short!"

　　Now Umslopogaas gasped for breath in his rage, and again he fingeredthe great axe. "It is well for you, O Mouth," he said, "that I sworesafe conduct to you, else you had not gone hence--else you had beenserved as I served certain soldiers who in bygone years were sent tosearch out one Umslopogaas. Yet I answer you in few words and short.Look on those spears--they are but a fourth part of the number I canmuster: that is my answer. Look now on yonder mountain, the mountainof ghosts and wolves--unknown, impassable, save to me and one other:that is my answer. Spears and mountains shall come together--themountain shall be alive with spears and with the fangs of beasts. LetDingaan seek his tribute there! I have spoken!"

　　Now I laughed shrilly, desiring to try the heart of Umslopogaas, myfosterling, yet further.

　　"Fool!" I said. "Boy with the brain of a monkey, for every spear youhave Dingaan, whom I serve, can send a hundred, and your mountainshall be stamped flat; and for your ghosts and wolves, see, with themouth of Dingaan I spit upon them!" and I spat upon the ground.

　　Now Umslopogaas shook in his rage, and the great axe glimmered as heshook. He turned to the captain who was behind him, and said: "Say,Galazi the Wolf, shall we kill this man and those with him?"

　　"Nay," answered the Wolf, grinning, "do not kill them; you have giventhem safe conduct. Moreover, let them go back to their dog of a king,that he may send out his puppies to do battle with our wolves. It willbe a pretty fight."

　　"Get you gone, O Mouth," said Umslopogaas; "get you gone swiftly, lestmischief befall you! Without my gates you shall find food to satisfyyour hunger. Eat of it and begone, for if to-morrow at the noon youare found within a spear's throw of this kraal, you and those with youshall bide there forever, O Mouth of Dingaan the king!"

　　Now I made as though I would depart, then, turning suddenly, I spokeonce more, saying:--

　　"There were words in your message to the Black One who is dead of acertain man--nay, how was he named?--of a certain Mopo."

　　Now Umslopogaas started as one starts who is wounded by a spear, andstared at me.

　　"Mopo! What of Mopo, O Mouth, whose eyes are veiled? Mopo is dead,whose son I was!"

　　"Ah!" I said, "yes, Mopo is dead--that is, the Black One who is gonekilled a certain Mopo. How came it, O Bulalio, that you were his son?"

　　"Mopo is dead," quoth Umslopogaas again; "he is dead with all hishouse, his kraal is stamped flat, and that is why I hated the BlackOne, and therefore I hate Dingaan, his brother, and will be as areMopo and the house of Mopo before I pay him tribute of a single ox."

　　All this while I had spoken to Umslopogaas in a feigned voice, myfather, but now I spoke again and in my own voice, saying:--

　　"So! Now you speak from your heart, young man, and by digging I havereached the root of the matter. It is because of this dead dog of aMopo that you defy the king."

　　Umslopogaas heard the voice, and trembled no more with anger, butrather with fear and wonder. He looked at me hard, answering nothing.

　　"Have you a hut near by, O Chief Bulalio, foe of Dingaan the king,where I, the mouth of the king, may speak with you a while apart, forI would learn your message word by word that I may deliver it withoutfault. Fear not, Slaughterer, to sit alone with me in an empty hut! Iam unarmed and old, and there is that in your hand which I shouldfear," and I pointed to the axe.

　　Now Umslopogaas, still shaking in his limbs, answered "Follow me, OMouth, and you, Galazi, stay with these men."

　　So I followed Umslopogaas, and presently we came to a large hut. Hepointed to the doorway, and I crept through it and he followed afterme. Now for a while it seemed dark in the hut, for the sun was sinkingwithout and the place was full of shadow; so I waited while a manmight count fifty, till our eyes could search the darkness. Then of asudden I threw the blanket from my face and looked into the yes ofUmslopogaas.

　　"Look on me now, O Chief Bulalio, O Slaughterer, who once was namedUmslopogaas--look on me and say who am I?" Then he looked at me andhis jaw fell.

　　"Either you are Mopo my father grown old--Mopo, who is dead, or theGhost of Mopo," he answered in a low voice.

　　"I am Mopo, your father, Umslopogaas," I said. "You have been long inknowing me, who knew you from the first."

　　Then Umslopogaas cried aloud, but yet softly, and letting fall the axeGroan-Maker, he flung himself upon my breast and wept there. And Iwept also.

　　"Oh! my father," he said, "I thought that you were dead with theothers, and now you have come back to me, and I, I would have liftedthe axe against you in my folly. Oh, it is well that I have lived, andnot died, since once more I look upon your face--the face that Ithought dead, but which yet lives, though it be sorely changed, asthough by grief and years."

　　"Peace, Umslopogaas, my son," I said. "I also deemed you dead in thelion's mouth, though in truth it seemed strange to me that any otherman than Umslopogaas could have wrought the deeds which I have heardof as done by Bulalio, Chief of the People of the Axe--ay, and throwndefiance in the teeth of Chaka. But you are not dead, and I, I am notdead. It was another Mopo whom Chaka killed; I slew Chaka, Chaka didnot slay me."

　　"And of Nada, what of Nada, my sister?" he said.

　　"Macropha, your mother, and Nada, your sister, are dead, Umslopogaas.They are dead at the hands of the people of the Halakazi, who dwell inSwaziland."

　　"I have heard of that people," he answered presently, "and so hasGalazi the Wolf, yonder. He has a hate to satisfy against them--theymurdered his father; now I have two, for they have murdered my motherand my sister. Ah, Nada, my sister! Nada, my sister!" and the greatman covered his face with his hands, and rocked himself to and fro inhis grief.

　　Now, my father, it came into my thoughts to make the truth plain toUmslopogaas, and tell him that Nada was no sister of his, and that hewas no son of mine, but rather of that Chaka whom my hand hadfinished. And yet I did not, though now I would that I had done so.For I saw well how great was the pride and how high was the heart ofUmslopogaas, and I saw also that if once he should learn that thethrone of Zululand was his by right, nothing could hold him back, forhe would swiftly break into open rebellion against Dingaan the king,and in my judgment the time was not ripe for that. Had I known,indeed, but one short year before that Umslopogaas still lived, he hadsat where Dingaan sat this day; but I did not know it, and the chancehad gone by for a while. Now Dingaan was king and mustered manyregiments about him, for I had held him back from war, as in the caseof the raid that he wished to make upon the Swazis. The chance hadgone by, but it would come again, and till it came I must say nothing.I would do this rather, I would bring Dingaan and Umslopogaastogether, that Umslopogaas might become known in the land as a greatchief and the first of warriors. Then I would cause him to be advancedto be an induna, and a general ready to lead the impis of the king,for he who leads the impis is already half a king.

　　So I held my peace upon this matter, but till the dawn was greyUmslopogaas and I sat together and talked, each telling the tale ofthose years that had gone since he was borne from me in the lion'smouth. I told him how all my wives and children had been killed, how Ihad been put to the torment, and showed him my white and witheredhand. I told him also of the death of Baleka, my sister, and of all mypeople of the Langeni, and of how I had revenged my wrongs upon Chaka,and made Dingaan to be king in his place, and was now the first man inthe land under the king, though the king feared me much and loved melittle. But I did not tell him that Baleka, my sister, was his ownmother.

　　When I had done my tale, Umslopogaas told me his: how Galazi hadrescued him from the lioness; how he became one of the Wolf-Brethren;how he had conquered Jikiza and the sons of Jikiza, and become chiefof the People of the Axe, and taken Zinita to wife, and grown great inthe land.

　　I asked him how it came about that he still hunted with the wolves ashe had done last night. He answered that now he was great and therewas nothing more to win, and at times a weariness of life came uponhim, and then he must up, and together with Galazi hunt and harry withthe wolves, for thus only could he find rest.

　　I said that I would show him better game to hunt before all was done,and asked him further if he loved his wife, Zinita. Umslopogaasanswered that he would love her better if she loved him not so much,for she was jealous and quick to anger, and that was a sorrow to him.Then, when he had slept awhile, he led me from the hut, and I andmy people were feasted with the best, and I spoke with Zinita and withGalazi the Wolf. For the last, I liked him well. This was a good manto have at one's back in battle; but my heart spoke to me againstZinita. She was handsome and tall, but with fierce eyes which alwayswatched Umslopogaas, my fosterling; and I noted that he who wasfearless of all other things yet seemed to fear Zinita. Neither didshe love me, for when she saw how the Slaughterer clung to me, as itwee, instantly she grew jealous--as already she was jealous of Galazi--and would have been rid of me if she might. Thus it came about thatmy heart spoke against Zinita; nor did it tell me worse things of herthan those which she was to do.

　　CHATPER XXIV

　　THE SLAYING OF THE BOERS

　　On the morrow I led Umslopogaas apart, and spoke to him thus:--

　　"My son, yesterday, when you did not know me except as the Mouth ofDingaan, you charged me with a certain message for Dingaan the king,that, had it been delivered into the ears of the king, had surelybrought death upon you and all your people. The tree that stands byitself on a plain, Umslopogaas, thinks itself tall and that there isno shade to equal its shade. Yet are there other and bigger trees. Youare such a solitary tree, Umslopogaas, but the topmost branches of himwhom I serve are thicker than your trunk, and beneath his shadow livemany woodcutters, who go out to lop those that would grow too high.You are no match for Dingaan, though, dwelling here alone in an emptyland, you have grown great in your own eyes and in the eyes of thoseabout you. Moreover, Umslopogaas, know this: Dingaan already hates youbecause of the words which in bygone years you sent by Masilo the foolto the Black One who is dead, for he heard those words, and it is hiswill to eat you up. He has sent me hither for one reason only, to berid of me awhile, and, whatever the words I bring back to him, the endwill be the same--that night shall come when you will find an impi atyour gates."

　　"Then what need to talk more of the matter, my father?" askedUmslopogaas. "That will come which must come. Let me wait here for theimpi of Dingaan, and fight till I do."

　　"Not so, Umslopogaas, my son; there are more ways of killing a manthan by the assegai, and a crooked stick can still be bent straight inthe stream. It is my desire, Umslopogaas, that instead of hate Dingaanshould give you love; instead of death, advancement; and that youshall grow great in his shadow. Listen! Dingaan is not what Chaka was,though, like Chaka, he is cruel. This Dingaan is a fool, and it maywell come about that a man can be found who, growing up in his shadow,in the end shall overshadow him. I might do it--I myself; but I amold, and, being worn with sorrow, have no longing to rule. But you areyoung, Umslopogaas, and there is no man like you in the land.Moreover, there are other matters of which it is not well to speak,that shall serve you as a raft whereon to swim to power."

　　Now Umslopogaas glanced up sharply, for in those days he wasambitious, and desired to be first among the people. Indeed, havingthe blood of Chaka in his veins, how could it be otherwise?

　　"What is your plan, my father?" he asked. "Say how can this be broughtabout?"

　　"This and thus, Umslopogaas. Among the tribe of the Halakazi inSwaziland there dwells a maid who is named the Lily. She is a girl ofthe most wonderful beauty, and Dingaan is afire with longing to haveher to wife. Now, awhile since Dingaan dispatched an embassy to thechief of the Halakazi asking the Lily in marriage, and the chief ofthe Halakazi sent back insolent words, saying that the Beauty of theEarth should be given to no Zulu dog as a wife. Then Dingaan wasangry, and he would have gathered his impis and sent them against theHalakazi to destroy them, and bring him the maid, but I held him backfrom it, saying that now was no time to begin a new war; and it is forthis cause that Dingaan hates me, he is so set upon the plucking ofthe Swazi Lily. Do you understand now, Umslopogaas?"

　　"Something," he answered. "But speak clearly."

　　"Wow, Umslopogaas! Half words are better than whole ones in this landof ours. Listen, then! This is my plan: that you should fall upon theHalakazi tribe, destroy it, and bring back the maid as a peace-offering to Dingaan."

　　"That is a good plan, my father," he answered. "At the least, maid orno maid, there will be fighting in it, and cattle to divide when thefighting is done."

　　"First conquer, then reckon up the spoils, Umslopogaas."

　　Now he thought awhile, then said, "Suffer that I summon Galazi theWolf, my captain. Do not fear, he is trusty and a man of few words."

　　Presently Galazi came and sat down before us. Then I put the matter tohim thus: that Umslopogaas would fall upon the Halakazi and bring toDingaan the maid he longed for as a peace-offering, but that I wishedto hold him back from the venture because the Halakazi people weregreat and strong. I spoke in this sense so that I might have a door tocreep out should Galazi betray the plot; and Umslopogaas read mypurpose, though my craft was needless, for Galazi was a true man.

　　Galazi the Wolf listened in silence till I had finished, then heanswered quietly, but it seemed to me that a fire shone in his eyes ashe spoke:--

　　"I am chief by right of the Halakazi, O Mouth of Dingaan, and knowthem well. They are a strong people, and can put two full regimentsunder arms, whereas Bulalio here can muster but one regiment, and thata small one. Moreover, they have watchmen out by night and day, andspies scattered through the land, so that it will be hard to take themunawares; also their stronghold is a vast cave open to the sky in themiddle, and none have won that stronghold yet, nor could it be foundexcept by those who know its secret. They are few, yet I am one ofthem, for my father showed it to me when I was a lad. Therefore, Mouthof Dingaan, you will know that this is no easy task which Bulaliowould set himself and us--to conquer the Halakazi. That is the face ofthe matter so far as it concerns Bulalio, but for me, O Mouth, it hasanother face. Know that, long years ago, I swore to my father as helay dying by the poison of a witch of this people that I would notrest till I had avenged him--ay, till I had stamped out the Halakazi,and slain their men, and brought their women to the houses ofstrangers, and their children to bonds! Year by year and month bymonth, and night by night, as I have lain alone upon the GhostMountain yonder, I have wondered how I might bring my oath to pass,and found no way. Now it seems that there is a way, and I am glad. Yetthis is a great adventure, and perhaps before it is done with thePeople of the Axe will be no more." And he ceased and took snuff,watching our faces over the spoon.

　　"Galazi the Wolf," said Umslopogaas, "for me also the matter hasanother face. You have lost your father at the hands of these Halakazidogs, and, though till last night I did not know it, I have lost mymother by their spears, and with her one whom I loved above all in theworld, my sister Nada, who loved me also. Both are dead and theHalakazi have killed them. This man, the mouth of Dingaan," and hepointed to me, Mopo, "this man says that if I can stamp out theHalakazi and make captive of the Lily maid, I shall win the heart ofDingaan. Little do I care for Dingaan, I who would go my way alone,and live while I may live, and die when I must, by the hands ofDingaan as by those of another--what does it matter? Yet, for thisreason, because of the death of Macropha, my mother, and Nada, thesister who was dear to me, I will make war upon these Halakazi andconquer them, or be conquered by them. Perhaps, O Mouth of Dingaan,you will see me soon at the king's kraal on the Mahlabatine, and withme the Lily maid and the cattle of the Halakazi; or perhaps you shallnot see me, and then you will know that I am dead, and the Warriors ofthe Axe are no more."

　　So Umslopogaas spoke to me before Galazi the Wolf, but afterwards heembraced me and bade me farewell, for he had no great hope that weshould meet again. And I also doubted it; for, as Galazi said, theadventure was great; yet, as I had seen many times, it is the boldthrower who oftenest wins. So we parted--I to return to Dingaan andtell him that Bulalio, Chief of the People of the Axe, had gone upagainst the Halakazi to win the Lily maid and bring her to him inatonement; while Umslopogaas remained to make ready his impi for war.

　　I went swiftly from the Ghost Mountain back to the kraalUmgugundhlovu, and presented myself before Dingaan, who at firstlooked on me coldly. But when I told him my message, and how that theChief Bulalio the Slaughterer had taken the war-path to win him theLily, his manner changed. He took me by the hand and said that I haddone well, and he had been foolish to doubt me when I lifted up myvoice to persuade him from sending an impi against the Halakazi. Nowhe saw that it was my purpose to rake this Halakazi fire with anotherhand than his, and to save his hand from the burning, and he thankedme.

　　Moreover, he said, that if this Chief of the People of the Axe broughthim the maid his heart desired, not only would he forgive him thewords he had spoken by the mouth of Masilo to the Black One who wasdead, but also all the cattle of the Halakazi should be his, and hewould make him great in the land. I answered that all this was as theking willed. I had but done my duty by the king and worked so that,whatever befell, a proud chief should be weakened and a foe should beattacked at no cost to the king, in such fashion also that perhaps itmight come about that the king would shortly have the Lily at hisside.

　　Then I sat down to wait what might befall.

　　Now it is, my father, that the white men come into my story, whom wenamed the Amaboona, but you call the Boers. Ou! I think ill of thoseAmaboona, though it was I who gave them the victory over Dingaan--Iand Umslopogaas.

　　Before this time, indeed, a few white men had come to and fro to thekraals of Chaka and Dingaan, but these came to pray and not to fight.Now the Boers both fight and pray, also they steal, or used to steal,which I do not understand, for the prayers of you white men say thatthese things should not be done.

　　Well, when I had been back from the Ghost Mountain something less thana moon, the Boers came, sixty of them commanded by a captain namedRetief, a big man, and armed with roers--the long guns they had inthose days--or, perhaps they numbered a hundred in all, counting theirservants and after-riders. This was their purpose: to get a grant ofthe land in Natal that lies between the Tugela and the Umzimouburivers. But, by my council and that of other indunas, Dingaan,bargained with the Boers that first they should attack a certain chiefnamed Sigomyela, who had stolen some of the king's cattle, and wholived near the Quathlamba Mountains, and bring back those cattle. Thisthe Boers agreed to, and went to attack the chief, and in a littlewhile they came back again, having destroyed the people of Sigomyela,and driving his cattle before them as well as those which had beenstolen from the king.

　　The face of Dingaan shone when he saw the cattle, and that night hecalled us, the council of the Amapakati, together, and asked us as tothe granting of the country. I spoke the first, and said that itmattered little if he granted it, seeing that the Black One who wasdead had already given it to the English, the People of George, andthe end of the matter would be that the Amaboona and the People ofGeorge would fight for the land. Yet the words of the Black One werecoming to pass, for already it seemed we could hear the sound of therunning of a white folk who should eat up the kingdom.

　　Now when I had spoken thus the heart of Dingaan grew heavy and hisface dark, for my words stuck in his breast like a barbed spear.Still, he made no answer, but dismissed the council.

　　On the morrow the king promised to sign the paper giving the landsthey asked for to the Boers, and all was smooth as water when there isno wind. Before the paper was signed the king gave a great dance, forthere were many regiments gathered at the kraal, and for three daysthis dance went on, but on the third day he dismissed the regiments,all except one, an impi of lads, who were commanded to stay. Now allthis while I wondered what was in the mind of Dingaan and was afraidfor the Amaboona. But he was secret, and told nothing except to thecaptains of the regiment alone--no, not even to one of his council.Yet I knew that he planned evil, and was half inclined to warn theCaptain Retief, but did not, fearing to make myself foolish. Ah! myfather, if I had spoken, how many would have lived who were soon dead!But what does it matter? In any case most of them would have been deadby now.

　　On the fourth morning, early, Dingaan sent a messenger to the Boers,bidding them meet him in the cattle kraal, for there he would mark thepaper. So they came, stacking their guns at the gate of the kraal, forit was death for any man, white or black, to come armed before thepresence of the king. Now, my father, the kraal Umgugundhlovu wasbuilt in a great circle, after the fashion of royal kraals. First camethe high outer fence, then the thousands of huts that ran three partsround between the great fence and the inner one. Within this innerfence was the large open space, big enough to hold five regiments, andat the top of it--opposite the entrance--stood the cattle kraalitself, that cut off a piece of the open space by another fence bentlike a bow. Behind this again were the Emposeni, the place of theking's women, the guard-house, the labyrinth, and the Intunkulu, thehouse of the king. Dingaan came out on that day and sat on a stool infront of the cattle kraal, and by him stood a man holding a shieldover his head to keep the sun from him. Also we of the Amapakati, thecouncil, were there, and ranged round the fence of the space, armedwith short sticks only--not with kerries, my father--was that regimentof young men which Dingaan had not sent away, the captain of theregiment being stationed near to the king, on the right.

　　Presently the Boers came in on foot and walked up to the king in abody, and Dingaan greeted them kindly and shook hands with Retief,their captain. Then Retief drew the paper from a leather pouch, whichset out the boundaries of the grant of land, and it was translated tothe king by an interpreter. Dingaan said that it was good, and put hismark upon it, and Retief and all the Boers were pleased, and smiledacross their faces. Now they would have said farewell, but Dingaanforbade them, saying that they must not go yet: first they must eatand see the soldiers dance a little, and he commanded dishes of boiledflesh which had been made ready and bowls of milk to be brought tothem. The Boers said that they had already eaten; still, they drankthe milk, passing the bowls from hand to hand.

　　Now the regiment began to dance, singing the Ingomo, that is the warchant of us Zulus, my father, and the Boers drew back towards thecentre of the space to give the soldiers room to dance in. It was atthis moment that I heard Dingaan give an order to a messenger to runswiftly to the white Doctor of Prayers, who was staying without thekraal, telling him not to be afraid, and I wondered what this mightmean; for why should the Prayer Doctor fear a dance such as he hadoften seen before? Presently Dingaan rose, and, followed by all,walked through the press to where the Captain Retief stood, and badehim good-bye, shaking him by the hand and bidding him hambla gachle,to go in peace. Then he turned and walked back again towards thegateway which led to his royal house, and I saw that near thisentrance stood the captain of the regiments, as one stands by whowaits for orders.

　　Now, of a sudden, my father, Dingaan stopped and cried with a loudvoice, "Bulalani Abatakati!" (slay the wizards), and having cried it,he covered his face with the corner of his blanket, and passed behindthe fence.

　　We, the councillors, stood astounded, like men who had become stone;but before we could speak or act the captain of the regiment had alsocried aloud, "Bulalani Abatakati!" and the signal was caught up fromevery side. Then, my father, came a yell and a rush of thousands offeet, and through the clouds of dust we saw the soldiers hurlthemselves upon the Amaboona, and above the shouting we heard thesound of falling sticks. The Amaboona drew their knives and foughtbravely, but before a man could count a hundred twice it was done, andthey were being dragged, some few dead, but the most yet living,towards the gates of the kraal and out on to the Hill of Slaughter,and there, on the Hill of Slaughter, they were massacred, every one ofthem. How? Ah! I will not tell you--they were massacred and piled in aheap, and that was the end of their story, my father.

　　Now I and the other councillors turned away and walked silentlytowards the house of the king. We found him standing before his greathut, and, lifting our hands, we saluted him silently, saying no word.It was Dingaan who spoke, laughing a little as he spoke, like a manwho is uneasy in his mind.

　　"Ah, my captains," he said, "when the vultures plumed themselves thismorning, and shrieked to the sky for blood, they did not look for sucha feast as I have given them. And you, my captains, you little guessedhow great a king the Heavens have set to rule over you, nor how deepis the mind of the king that watches ever over his people's welfare.Now the land is free from the White Wizards of whose footsteps theBlack One croaked as he gave up his life, or soon shall be, for thisis but a beginning. Ho! Messengers!" and he turned to some men whostood behind him, "away swiftly to the regiments that are gatheredbehind the mountains, away to them, bearing the king's words to thecaptains. This is the king's word: that the impi shall run to the landof Natal and slay the Boers there, wiping them out, man, woman, andchild. Away!"

　　Now the messengers cried out the royal salute of Bayete, and, leapingforward like spears from the hand of the thrower, were gone at once.But we, the councillors, the members of the Amapakati, still stoodsilent.

　　Then Dingaan spoke again, addressing me:--

　　"Is thy heart at rest now, Mopo, son of Makedama? Ever hast thoubleated in my ear of this white people and of the deeds that theyshall do, and lo! I have blown upon them with my breath and they aregone. Say, Mopo, are the Amaboona wizards yonder all dead? If any beleft alive, I desire to speak with one of them."

　　Then I looked Dingaan in the face and spoke.

　　"They are all dead, and thou, O King, thou also art dead."

　　"It were well for thee, thou dog," said Dingaan, "that thou shouldstmake thy meaning plain."

　　"Let the king pardon me," I answered; "this is my meaning. Thou canstnot kill this white men, for they are not of one race, but of manyraces, and the sea is their home; they rise out of the black water.Destroy those that are here, and others shall come to avenge them,more and more and more! Now thou hast smitten in thy hour; in theirsthey shall smite in turn. Now THEY lie low in blood at thy hand; in aday to come, O King, THOU shalt lie low in blood at theirs. Madnesshas taken hold of thee, O King, that thou hast done this thing, andthe fruit of thy madness shall be thy death. I have spoken, I, who amthe king's servant. Let the will of the king be done."

　　Then I stood still waiting to be killed, for, my father, in the furyof my heart at the wickedness which had been worked I could not holdback my words. Thrice Dingaan looked on me with a terrible face, andyet there was fear in his face striving with its rage, and I waitedcalmly to see which would conquer, the fear or the rage. When at lasthe spoke, it was one word, "Go!" not three words, "Take him away." SoI went yet living, and with me the councillors, leaving the kingalone.

　　I went with a heavy heart, my father, for of all the evil sights thatI have seen it seemed to me that this was the most evil--that theAmaboona should be slaughtered thus treacherously, and that the impisshould be sent out treacherously to murder those who were left ofthem, together with their women and children. Ay, and they slew--sixhundred of them did they slay--yonder in Weenen, the land of weeping.

　　Say, my father, why does the Umkulunkulu who sits in the Heavens aboveallow such things to be done on the earth beneath? I have heard thepreaching of the white men, and they say that they know all about Him--that His names are Power and Mercy and Love. Why, then, does Hesuffer these things to be done--why does He suffer such men as Chakaand Dingaan to torment the people of the earth, and in the end paythem but one death for all the thousands that they have given toothers? Because of the wickedness of the peoples, you say; but no, no,that cannot be, for do not the guiltless go with the guilty--ay, donot the innocent children perish by the hundred? Perchance there isanother answer, though who am I, my father, that I, in my folly,should strive to search out the way of the Unsearchable? Perchance itis but a part of the great plan, a little piece of that pattern ofwhich I spoke--the pattern on the cup that holds the waters of Hiswisdom. Wow! I do not understand, who am but a wild man, nor have Ifound more knowledge in the hearts of you tamed white people. You knowmany things, but of these you do not know: you cannot tell us what wewere an hour before birth, nor what we shall be an hour after death,nor why we were born, nor why we die. You can only hope and believe--that is all, and perhaps, my father, before many days are sped I shallbe wiser than all of you. For I am very aged, the fire of my lifesinks low--it burns in my brain alone; there it is still bright, butsoon that will go out also, and then perhaps I shall understand.

　　CHAPTER XXV

　　THE WAR WITH THE HALAKAZI PEOPLE

　　Now, my father, I must tell of how Umslopogaas the Slaughterer andGalazi the Wolf fared in their war against the People of the Halakazi.When I had gone from the shadow of the Ghost Mountain, Umslopogaassummoned a gathering of all his headmen, and told them it was hisdesire that the People of the Axe should no longer be a little people;that they should grow great and number their cattle by tens ofthousands.

　　The headmen asked how this might be brought about--would he then makewar on Dingaan the King? Umslopogaas answered no, he would win thefavour of the king thus: and he told them of the Lily maid and of theHalakazi tribe in Swaziland, and of how he would go up against thattribe. Now some of the headmen said yea to this and some said nay, andthe talk ran high and lasted till the evening. But when the eveningwas come Umslopogaas rose and said that he was chief under the Axe,and none other, and it was his will that they should go up against theHalakazi. If there was any man there who would gainsay his will, lethim stand forward and do battle with him, and he who conquered shouldorder all things. To this there was no answer, for there were few whocared to face the beak of Groan-Maker, and so it came about that itwas agreed that the People of the Axe should make war upon theHalakazi, and Umslopogaas sent out messengers to summon everyfighting-man to his side.

　　But when Zinita, his head wife, came to hear of the matter she wasangry, and upbraided Umslopogaas, and heaped curses on me, Mopo, whomshe knew only as the mouth of Dingaan, because, as she said truly, Ihad put this scheme into the mind of the Slaughterer. "What!" she wenton, "do you not live here in peace and plenty, and must you go to makewar on those who have not harmed you; there, perhaps, to perish or tocome to other ill? You say you do this to win a girl for Dingaan andto find favour in his sight. Has not Dingaan girls more than he cancount? It is more likely that, wearying of us, your wives, you go toget girls for yourself, Bulalio; and as for finding favour, restquiet, so shall you find most favour. If the king sends his impisagainst you, then it will be time to fight, O fool with little wit!"

　　Thus Zinita spoke to him, very roughly--for she always blurted outwhat was in her mind, and Umslopogaas could not challenge her tobattle. So he must bear her talk as best he might, for it is oftenthus, my father, that the greatest of men grow small enough in theirown huts. Moreover, he knew that it was because Zinita loved him thatshe spoke so bitterly.

　　Now on the third day all the fighting-men were gathered, and theremight have been two thousand of them, good men and brave. ThenUmslopogaas went out and spoke to them, telling them of thisadventure, and Galazi the Wolf was with him. They listened silently,and it was plain to see that, as in the case of the headmen, some ofthem thought one thing and some another. Then Galazi spoke to thembriefly, telling them that he knew the roads and the caves and thenumber of the Halakazi cattle; but still they doubted. ThereonUmslopogaas added these words:--

　　"To-morrow, at the dawn, I, Bulalio, Holder of the Axe, Chief of thePeople of the Axe, go up against the Halakazi, with Galazi the Wolf,my brother. If but ten men follow us, yet we will go. Now, choose, yousoldiers! Let those come who will, and let those who will stop at homewith the women and the little children."

　　Now a great shout rose from every throat.

　　"We will go with you, Bulalio, to victory or death!"

　　So on the morrow they marched, and there was wailing among the womenof the People of the Axe. Only Zinita did not wail, but stood by inwrath, foreboding evil; nor would she bid her lord farewell, yet whenhe was gone she wept also.

　　Now Umslopogaas and his impi travelled fast and far, hungering andthirsting, till at length they came to the land of the Umswazi, andafter a while entered the territory of the Halakazi by a high andnarrow pass. The fear of Galazi the Wolf was that they should findthis pass held, for though they had harmed none in the kraals as theywent, and taken only enough cattle to feed themselves, yet he knewwell that messengers had sped by day and night to warn the people ofthe Halakazi. But they found no man in the pass, and on the other sideof it they rested, for the night was far spent. At dawn Umslopogaaslooked out over the wide plains beyond, and Galazi showed him a longlow hill, two hours' march away.

　　"There, my brother," he said, "lies the head kraal of the Halakazi,where I was born, and in that hill is the great cave."

　　Then they went on, and before the sun was high they came to the crestof a rise, and heard the sound of horns on its farther side. Theystood upon the rise, and looked, and lo! yet far off, but runningtowards them, was the whole impi of the Halakazi, and it was a greatimpi.

　　"They have gathered their strength indeed," said Galazi. "For everyman of ours there are three of these Swazis!"

　　The soldiers saw also, and the courage of some of them sank low. ThenUmslopogaas spoke to them:--

　　"Yonder are the Swazi dogs, my children; they are many and we are few.Yet, shall it be told at home that we, men of the Zulu blood, werehunted by a pack of Swazi dogs? Shall our women and children sing THATsong in our ears, O Soldiers of the Axe?"

　　Now some cried "Never!" but some were silent; so Umslopogaas spokeagain:--

　　"Turn back all who will: there is yet time. Turn back all who will,but ye who are men come forward with me. Or if ye will, go back all ofyou, and leave Axe Groan-Maker and Club Watcher to see this matter outalone."

　　Now there arose a mighty shout of "We will die together who have livedtogether!"

　　"Do you swear it?" cried Umslopogaas, holding Groan-Maker on high.

　　"We swear it by the Axe," they answered.

　　Then Umslopogaas and Galazi made ready for the battle. They posted allthe young men in the broken ground above the bottom of the slope, forthese could best be spared to the spear, and Galazi the Wolf tookcommand of them; but the veterans stayed upon the hillside, and withthem Umslopogaas.

　　Now the Halakazi came on, and there were four full regiments of them.The plain was black with them, the air was rent with their shoutings,and their spears flashed like lightnings. On the farther side of theslope they halted and sent a herald forward to demand what the Peopleof the Axe would have from them. The Slaughterer answered that theywould have three things: First, the head of their chief, whose placeGalazi should fill henceforth; secondly, that fair maid whom men namedthe Lily; thirdly, a thousand head of cattle. If these demands weregranted, then he would spare them, the Halakazi; if not, he wouldstamp them out and take all.

　　So the herald returned, and when he reached the ranks of the Halakazihe called aloud his answer. Then a great roar of laughter went up fromthe Halakazi regiments, a roar that shook the earth. The brow ofUmslopogaas the Slaughterer burned red beneath the black when he heardit, and he shook Groan-Maker towards their host.

　　"Ye shall sing another song before this sun is set," he cried, andstrode along the ranks speaking to this man and that by name, andlifting up their hearts with great words.

　　Now the Halakazi raised a shout, and charged to come at the young menled by Galazi the Wolf; but beyond the foot of the slope was peatyground, and they came through it heavily, and as they came Galazi andthe young men fell upon them and slew them; still, they could not holdthem back for long, because of their great numbers, and presently thebattle ranged all along the slope. But so well did Galazi handle theyoung men, and so fiercely did they fight beneath his eye, that beforethey could be killed or driven back all the force of the Halakazi wasdoing battle with them. Ay, and twice Galazi charged with such as hecould gather, and twice he checked the Halakazi rush, throwing theminto confusion, till at length company was mixed with company andregiment with regiment. But it might not endure, for now more thanhalf the young men were down, and the rest were being pushed back upthe hill, fighting madly.

　　But all this while Umslopogaas and the veterans sat in their ranksupon the brow of the slope and watched. "Those Swazi dogs have a foolfor their general," quoth Umslopogaas. "He has no men left to fallback on, and Galazi has broken his array and mixed his regiments asmilk and cream are mixed in a bowl. They are no longer an impi, theyare a mob."

　　Now the veterans moved restlessly on their haunches, pushing theirlegs out and drawing them in again. They glanced at the fray, theylooked into each other's eyes and spoke a word here, a word there,"Well smitten, Galazi! Wow! that one is down! A brave lad! Ho! a goodclub is the Watcher! The fight draws near, my brother!" And ever asthey spoke their faces grew fiercer and their fingers played withtheir spears.

　　At length a captain called aloud to Umslopogaas:--

　　"Say, Slaughterer, is it not time to be up and doing? The grass is wetto sit on, and our limbs grow cramped."

　　"Wait awhile," answered Umslopogaas. "Let them weary of their play.Let them weary, I tell you."

　　As he spoke the Halakazi huddled themselves together, and with a rushdrove back Galazi and those who were left of the young men. Yes, atlast they were forced to flee, and after them came the Swazis, and inthe forefront of the pursuit was their chief, ringed round with acircle of his bravest.

　　Umslopogaas saw it and bounded to his feet, roaring like a bull. "Atthem now, wolves!" he shouted.

　　Then the lines of warriors sprang up as a wave springs, and theircrests were like foam upon the wave. As a wave that swells to breakthey rose suddenly, like a breaking wave they poured down the slope.In front of them was the Slaughterer, holding Groan-Maker aloft, andoh! his feet were swift. So swift were his feet that, strive as theywould, he outran them by the quarter of a spear's throw. Galazi heardthe thunder of their rush; he looked round, and as he looked, lo! theSlaughterer swept past him, running like a buck. Then Galazi, too,bounded forward, and the Wolf-Brethren sped down the hill, the lengthof four spears between them.

　　The Halakazi also saw and heard, and strove to gather themselvestogether to meet the rush. In front of Umslopogaas was their chief, atall man hedged about with assegais. Straight at the shield-hedgedrove Umslopogaas, and a score of spears were lifted to greet him, ascore of shields heaved into the air--this was a fence that none mightpass alive. Yet would the Slaughterer pass it--not alone! See! hesteadies his pace, he gathers himself together, and now he leaps! Highinto the air he leaps; his feet knock the heads of the warriors andrattle against the crowns of their shields. They smite upwards withthe spear, but he has swept over them like a swooping bird. He hascleared them--he has lit--and now the shield-hedge guards two chiefs.But not for long. Ou! Groan-Maker is aloft, he falls--and neithershield nor axe may stay his stroke, both are cleft through, and theHalakazi lack a leader.

　　The shield-ring wheels in upon itself. Fools! Galazi is upon you! Whatwas that? Look, now! see how many bones are left unbroken in him whomthe Watcher falls on full! What!--another down! Close up, shield-men--close up! Ai! are you fled?

　　Ah! the wave has fallen on the beach. Listen to its roaring--listen tothe roaring of the shields! Stand, you men of the Halakazi--stand!Surely they are but a few. So! it is done! By the head of Chaka! theybreak--they are pushed back--now the wave of slaughter seethes alongthe sands--now the foe is swept like floating weed, and from all theline there comes a hissing like the hissing of thin waters. "S'gee!"says the hiss. "S'gee! S'gee!"

　　There, my father, I am old. What have I do with the battle any more,with the battle and its joy? Yet it is better to die in such a fightas that than to live any other way. I have seen such--I have seen manysuch. Oh! we could fight when I was a man, my father, but none that Iknew could ever fight like Umslopogaas the Slaughterer, son of Chaka,and his blood-brother Galazi the Wolf! So, so! they swept them away,those Halakazi; they swept them as a maid sweeps the dust of a hut, asthe wind sweeps the withered leaves. It was soon done when once it wasbegun. Some were fled and some were dead, and this was the end of thatfight. No, no, not of all the war. The Halakazi were worsted in thefield, but many lived to win the great cave, and there the work mustbe finished. Thither, then, went the Slaughterer presently, with suchof his impi as was left to him. Alas! many were killed; but how couldthey have died better than in that fight? Also those who were leftwere as good as all, for now they knew that they should not beovercome easily while Axe and Club still led the way.

　　Now they stood before a hill, measuring, perhaps, three thousand pacesround its base. It was of no great height, and yet unclimbable, for,after a man had gone up a little way, the sides of it were sheer,offering no foothold except to the rock-rabbits and the lizards. Noone was to be seen without this hill, nor in the great kraal of theHalakazi that lay to the east of it, and yet the ground about wastrampled with the hoofs of oxen and the feet of men, and from withinthe mountain came a sound of lowing cattle.

　　"Here is the nest of Halakazi," quoth Galazi the Wolf.

　　"Here is the nest indeed," said Umslopogaas; "but how shall we come atthe eggs to suck them? There are no branches on this tree."

　　"But there is a hole in the trunk," answered the Wolf.

　　Now he led them a little way till they came to a place where the soilwas trampled as it is at the entrance to a cattle kraal, and they sawthat there was a low cave which led into the cliff, like an archwaysuch as you white men build. but this archway was filled up with greatblocks of stone placed upon each other in such a fashion that it couldnot be forced from without. After the cattle were driven in it hadbeen filled up.

　　"We cannot enter here," said Galazi. "Follow me."

　　So they followed him, and came to the north side of the mountain, andthere, two spear-casts away, a soldier was standing. But when he sawthem he vanished suddenly.

　　"There is the place," said Galazi, "and the fox has gone to earth init."

　　Now they ran to the spot and saw a little hole in the rock, scarcelybigger than an ant-bear's burrow, and through the hole came sounds andsome light.

　　"Now where is the hyena who will try a new burrow?" cried Umslopogaas."A hundred head of cattle to the man who wins through and clears theway!"

　　Then two young men sprang forward who were flushed with victory anddesired nothing more than to make a great name and win cattle,crying:--

　　"Here are hyenas, Bulalio."

　　"To earth, then!" said Umslopogaas, "and let him who wins through holdthe path awhile till others follow."

　　The two young men sprang at the hole, and he who reached it first wentdown upon his hands and knees and crawled in, lying on his shield andholding his spear before him. For a little while the light in theburrow vanished, and they heard the sound of his crawling. Then camethe noise of blows, and once more light crept through the hole. Theman was dead.

　　"This one had a bad snake," said the second soldier; "his snakedeserted him. Let me see if mine is better."

　　So down he went on his hands and knees, and crawled as the first haddone, only he put his shield over his head. For awhile they heard himcrawling, then once more came the sound of blows echoing on theox-hide shield, and after the blows groans. He was dead also, yet itseemed that they had left his body in the hole, for now no light camethrough. This was the cause, my father: when they struck the man hehad wriggled back a little way and died there, and none had enteredfrom the farther side to drag him out.

　　Now the soldiers stared at the mouth of the passage and none seemed tolove the look of it, for this was but a poor way to die. Umslopogaasand Galazi also looked at it, thinking.

　　"Now I am named Wolf," said Galazi, "and a wolf should not fear thedark; also, these are my people, and I must be the first to visitthem," and he went down on his hands and knees without more ado. ButUmslopogaas, having peered once more down the burrow, said: "Hold,Galazi; I will go first! I have a plan. Do you follow me. And you, mychildren, shout loudly, so that none may hear us move; and, if we winthrough, follow swiftly, for we cannot hold the mouth of that placefor long. Hearken, also! this is my counsel to you: if I fall chooseanother chief--Galazi the Wolf, if he is still living."

　　"Nay, Slaughterer, do not name me," said the Wolf, "for together welive or die."

　　"So let it be, Galazi. Then choose you some other man and try thisroad no more, for if we cannot pass it none can, but seek food and sitdown here till those jackals bolt; then be ready. Farewell, mychildren!"

　　"Farewell, father," they answered, "go warily, lest we be left likecattle without a herdsman, wandering and desolate."

　　Then Umslopogaas crept into the hole, taking no shield, but holdingGroan-Maker before him, and at his heels crept Galazi. When he hadcovered the length of six spears he stretched out his hand, and, as hetrusted to do, he found the feet of that man who had gone before anddied in the place. Then Umslopogaas the way did this: he put his headbeneath the dead man's legs and thrust himself onward till all thebody was on his back, and there he held it with one hand, gripping itstwo wrists in his hand. Then he crawled forward a little space and sawthat he was coming to the inner mouth of the burrow, but that theshadow was deep there because of a great mass of rock which lay beforethe burrow shutting out the light. "This is well for me," thoughtUmslopogaas, "for now they will not know the dead from the living. Imay yet look upon the son again." Now he heard the Halakazi soldierstalking without.

　　"The Zulu rats do not love this run," said one, "they fear the rat-catcher's stick. This is good sport," and a man laughed.

　　Then Umslopogaas pushed himself forward as swiftly as he could,holding the dead man on his back, and suddenly came out of the holeinto the open place in the dark shadow of the great rock.

　　"By the Lily," cried a soldier, "here's a third! Take this, Zulu rat!"And he struck the dead man heavily with a kerrie. "And that!" criedanother, driving his spear through him so that it pricked Umslopogaasbeneath. "And that! and this! and that!" said others, as they smoteand stabbed.

　　Now Umslopogaas groaned heavily in the deep shadow and lay still. "Noneed to waste more blows," said the man who had struck first. "Thisone will never go back to Zululand, and I think that few will care tofollow him. Let us make an end: run, some of you, and find stones tostop the burrow, for now the sport is done."

　　He turned as he spoke and so did the others, and this was what theSlaughter sought. With a swift movement, he freed himself from thedead man and sprang to his feet. They heard the sound and turnedagain, but as they turned Groan-Maker pecked softly, and that man whohad sworn by the Lily was no more a man. Then Umslopogaas leapedforwards, and, bounding on to the great rock, stood there like a buck

　　against the sky.

　　"A Zulu rat is not so easily slain, O ye weasels!" he cried, as theycame at him from all sides at once with a roar. He smote to the rightand the left, and so swiftly that men could scarcely see the blowsfall, for he struck with Groan-Maker's beak. But though men scarcelysaw the blows, yet, my father, men fell beneath them. Now foes wereall around, leaping up at the Slaughterer as rushing water leaps tohide a rock--everywhere shone spears, thrusting at him from this sideand from that. Those in front and to the side Groan-Maker served tostay, but one wounded Umslopogaas in the neck, and another was liftedto pierce his back when the strength of its holder was bowed to thedust--to the dust, to become of the dust.

　　For now the Wolf was through the hole also, and the Watcher grew verybusy; he was so busy that soon the back of the Slaughterer had nothingto fear--yet those had much to fear who stood behind his back. Thepair fought bravely, making a great slaughter, and presently, one byone, plumed heads of the People of the Axe showed through the burrowand strong arms mingled in the fray. Swiftly they came, leaping intobattle as otters leap to the water--now there were ten of them, nowthere were twenty--and now the Halakazi broke and fled, since they didnot bargain for this. Then the rest of the Men of the Axe came throughin peace, and the evening grew towards the dark before all had passedthe hole.

　　CHAPTER XXVI

　　THE FINDING OF NADA

　　Umslopogaas marshalled his companies.

　　"There is little light left," he said, "but it must serve us to startthese conies from their burrows. Come, my brother Galazi, you knowwhere the conies hide, take my place and lead us."

　　So Galazi led the impi. Turning a corner of the glen, he came withthem to a large open space that had a fountain in its midst, and thisplace was full of thousands of cattle. Then he turned again to theleft, and brought them to the inner side of the mountain, where thecliff hung over, and here was the mouth of a great cave. Now the cavewas dark, but by its door was stacked a pile of resinous wood to serveas torches.

　　"Here is that which will give us light," said Galazi, and one man ofevery two took a torch and lit it at a fire that burned near the mouthof the cave. Then they rushed in, waving the flaring torches and withassegais aloft. Here for the last time the Halakazi stood againstthem, and the torches floated up and down upon the wave of war. Butthey did not stand for very long, for all the heart was out of them.Wow! yes, many were killed--I do not know how many. I know this only,that the Halakazi are no more a tribe since Umslopogaas, who is namedBulalio, stamped them with his feet--they are nothing but a name now.The People of the Axe drove them out into the open and finished thefight by starlight among the cattle.

　　In one corner of the cave Umslopogaas saw a knot of men clusteringround something as though to guard it. He rushed at the men, and withhim went Galazi and others. But when Umslopogaas was through, by thelight of his torch he perceived a tall and slender man, who leanedagainst the wall of the cave and held a shield before his face.

　　"You are a coward!" he cried, and smote with Groan-Maker. The greataxe pierced the hide, but, missing the head behind, rang loudlyagainst the rock, and as it struck a sweet voice said:--

　　"Ah! soldier, do not kill me! Why are you angry with me?"

　　Now the shield had come away from its holder's hands upon the blade ofthe axe, and there was something in the notes of the voice that causedUmslopogaas to smite no more: it was as though a memory of childhoodhad come to him in a dream. His torch was burning low, but he thrustit forward to look at him who crouched against the rock. The dress wasthe dress of a man, but this was no man's form--nay, rather that of alovely woman, well-nigh white in colour. She dropped her hands frombefore her face, and now he could see her well. He saw eyes that shonelike stars, hair that curled and fell upon the shoulders, and suchbeauty as was not known among our people. And as the voice had spokento him of something that was lost, so did the eyes seem to shineacross the blackness of many years, and the beauty to bring back heknew not what.

　　He looked at the girl in all her loveliness, and she looked at him inhis fierceness and his might, red with war and wounds. They bothlooked long, while the torchlight flared on them, on the walls of thecave, and the broad blade of Groan-Maker, and from around rose thesounds of the fray.

　　"How are you named, who are so fair to see?" he asked at length.

　　"I am named the Lily now: once I had another name. Nada, daughter ofMopo, I was once; but name and all else are dead, and I go to jointhem. Kill me and make an end. I will shut my eyes, that I may not seethe great axe flash."

　　Now Umslopogaas gazed upon her again, and Groan-Maker fell from hishand.

　　"Look on me, Nada, daughter of Mopo," he said in a low voice; "look atme and say who am I."

　　She looked once more and yet again. Now her face was thrust forward asone who gazes over the edge of the world; it grew fixed and strange."By my heart," she said, "by my heart, you are Umslopogaas, my brotherwho is dead, and whom dead as living I have loved ever and alone."

　　Then the torch flared out, but Umslopogaas took hold of her in thedarkness and pressed her to him and kissed her, the sister whom hefound after many years, and she kissed him.

　　"You kiss me now," she said, "yet not long ago that great axe shore mylocks, missing me but by a finger's-breadth--and still the sound offighting rings in my ears! Ah! a boon of you, my brother--a boon: letthere be no more death since we are met once more. The people of theHalakazi are conquered, and it is their just doom, for thus, in thissame way, they killed those with whom I lived before. Yet they havetreated me well, not forcing me into wedlock, and protecting me fromDingaan; so spare them, my brother, if you may."

　　Then Umslopogaas lifted up his voice, commanding that the killingshould cease, and sent messengers running swiftly with these words:"This is the command of Bulalio: that he should lifts hand against onemore of the people of the Halakazi shall be killed himself"; and thesoldiers obeyed him, though the order came somewhat late, and no moreof the Halakazi were brought to doom. They were suffered to escape,except those of the women and children who were kept to be led away ascaptives. And they ran far that night. Nor did they come togetheragain to be a people, for they feared Galazi the Wolf, who would bechief over them, but they were scattered wide in the world, to sojournamong strangers.

　　Now when the soldiers had eaten abundantly of the store of theHalakazi, and guards had been sent to ward the cattle and watchagainst surprise, Umslopogaas spoke long with Nada the Lily, takingher apart, and he told her all his story. She told him also the talewhich you know, my father, of how she had lived with the little peoplethat were subject to the Halakazi, she and her mother Macropha, andhow the fame of her beauty had spread about the land. Then she toldhim how the Halakazi had claimed her, and of how, in the end, they hadtaken her by force of arms, killing the people of that kraal, andamong them her own mother. Thereafter, she had dwelt among theHalakazi, who named her anew, calling her the Lily, and they hadtreated her kindly, giving her reverence because of her sweetness andbeauty, and not forcing her into marriage.

　　"And why would you not wed, Nada, my sister?" asked Umslopogaas, "youwho are far past the age of marriage?"

　　"I cannot tell you," she answered, hanging her head; "but I have noheart that way. I only seek to be left alone."

　　Now Umslopogaas thought awhile and spoke. "Do you not know then, Nada,why it is that I have made this war, and why the people of theHalakazi are dead and scattered and their cattle the prize of my arm?I will tell you: I am come here to win you, whom I knew only by reportas the Lily maid, the fairest of women, to be a wife to Dingaan. Thereason that I began this war was to win you and make my peace withDingaan, and now I have carried it through to the end."

　　Now when she heard these words, Nada the Lily trembled and wept, and,sinking to the earth, she clasped the knees of Umslopogaas insupplication: "Oh, do not this cruel thing by me, your sister," sheprayed; "take rather that great axe and make an end of me, and of thebeauty which has wrought so much woe, and most of all to me who wearit! Would that I had not moved my head behind the shield, but hadsuffered the axe to fall upon it. To this end I was dressed as a man,that I might meet the fate of a man. Ah! a curse be on my woman'sweakness that snatched me from death to give me up to shame!"

　　Thus she prayed to Umslopogaas in her low sweet voice, and his heartwas shaken in him, though, indeed, he did not now purpose to give Nadato Dingaan, as Baleka was given to Chaka, perhaps in the end to meetthe fate of Baleka.

　　"There are many, Nada," he said, "who would think it no misfortunethat they should be given as a wife to the first of chiefs."

　　"Then I am not of their number," she answered; "nay, I will die first,by my own hand if need be."

　　Now Umslopogaas wondered how it came about that Nada looked uponmarriage thus, but he did not speak of the matter; he said only, "Tellme then, Nada, how I can deliver myself of this charge. I must go toDingaan as I promised our father Mopo, and what shall I say to Dingaanwhen he asks for the Lily whom I went out to pluck and whom his heartdesires? What shall I say to save myself alive from the wrath ofDingaan?"

　　Then Nada thought and answered, "You shall say this, my brother. Youshall tell him that the Lily, being clothed in the war-dress of awarrior, fell by chance in the fray. See, now, none of your peopleknow that you have found me; they are thinking of other things thanmaids in the hour of their victory. This, then, is my plan: we willsearch now by the starlight till we find the body of a fair maid, for,doubtless, some were killed by hazard in the fight, and on her we willset a warrior's dress, and lay by her the corpse of one of your ownmen. To-morrow, at the light, you shall take the captains of yoursoldiers and, having laid the body of the girl in the dark of thecave, you shall show it to them hurriedly, and tell them that this wasthe Lily, slain by one of your own people, whom in your wrath you slewalso. They will not look long on so common a sight, and if by hazardthey see the maid, and think her not so very fair, they will deem thatit is death which has robbed her of her comeliness. So the tale whichyou must tell to Dingaan shall be built up firmly, and Dingaan shallbelieve it to be true."

　　"And how shall this be, Nada?" asked Umslopogaas. "How shall this bewhen men see you among the captives and know you by your beauty? Arethere, then, two such Lilies in the land?"

　　"I shall not be known, for I shall not be seen, Umslopogaas. You mustset me free to-night. I will wander hence disguised as a youth andcovered with a blanket, and if any meet me, who shall say that I amthe Lily?"

　　"And where will you wander, Nada? to your death? Must we, then, meetafter so many years to part again for ever?"

　　"Where was it that you said you lived, my brother? Beneath the shadeof a Ghost Mountain, that men may know by a shape of stone which isfashioned like an old woman frozen into stone, was it not? Tell me ofthe road thither."

　　So Umslopogaas told her the road, and she listened silently.

　　"Good," she said. "I am strong and my feet are swift; perhaps they mayserve to bring me so far, and perhaps, if I win the shadow of thatmountain, you will find me a hut to hide in, Umslopogaas, my brother."

　　"Surely it shall be so, my sister," answered Umslopogaas, "and yet theway is long and many dangers lie in the path of a maid journeyingalone, without food or shelter," and as he spoke Umslopogaas thoughtof Zinita his wife, for he guessed that she would not love Nada,although she was only his sister.

　　"Still, it must be travelled, and the dangers must be braved," sheanswered, smiling. "Alas! there is no other way."

　　Then Umslopogaas summoned Galazi the Wolf and told him all this story,for Galazi was the only man whom he could trust. The Wolf listened insilence, marvelling the while at the beauty of Nada, as the starlightshowed it. When everything was told, he said only that he no longerwondered that the people of the Halakazi had defied Dingaan andbrought death upon themselves for the sake of this maid. Still, to beplain, his heart thought ill of the matter, for death was not donewith yet: there before them shone the Star of Death, and he pointed tothe Lily.

　　Now Nada trembled at his words of evil omen, and the Slaughterer grewangry, but Galazi would neither add to them nor take away from them."I have spoken that which my heart hears," he answered.

　　Then they rose and went to search among the dead for a girl who wouldsuit their purpose; soon they found one, a tall and fair maiden, andGalazi bore her in his arms to the great cave. Here in the cave werenone but the dead, and, tossed hither and thither in their last sleep,they looked awful in the glare of the torches.

　　"They sleep sound," said the Lily, gazing on them; "rest is sweet."

　　"We shall soon win it, maiden," answered Galazi, and again Nadatrembled.

　　Then, having arrayed her in the dress of a warrior, and put a shieldand spear by her, they laid down the body of the girl in a dark placein the cave, and, finding a dead warrior of the People of the Axe,placed him beside her. Now they left the cave, and, pretending thatthey visited the sentries, Umslopogaas and Galazi passed from spot tospot, while the Lily walked after them like a guard, hiding her facewith a shield, holding a spear in her hand, and having with her a bagof corn and dried flesh.

　　So they passed on, till at length they came to the entrance in themountain side. The stones that had blocked it were pulled down so asto allow those of the Halakazi to fly who had been spared at theentreaty of Nada, but there were guards by the entrance to watch thatnone came back. Umslopogaas challenged them, and they saluted him, buthe saw that they were worn out with battle and journeying, and knewlittle of what they saw or said. Then he, Galazi, and Nada and passedthrough the opening on to the plain beyond.

　　Here the Slaughterer and the Lily bade each other farewell, whileGalazi watched, and presently the Wolf saw Umslopogaas return as onewho is heavy at heart, and caught sight of the Lily skimming acrossthe plain lightly like a swallow.

　　"I do not know when we two shall meet again," said Umslopogaas so soonas she had melted into the shadows of the night.

　　"May you never meet," answered Galazi, "for I am sure that if you meetthat sister of yours will bring death on many more than those who nowlie low because of her loveliness. She is a Star of Death, and whenshe sets the sky shall be blood red."

　　Umslopogaas did not answer, but walked slowly through the archway inthe mountain side.

　　"How is this, chief?" said he who was captain of the guard. "Threewent out, but only two return."

　　"Fool!" answered Umslopogaas. "Are you drunk with Halakazi beer, orblind with sleep? Two went out, and two return. I sent him who waswith us back to the camp."

　　"So be it, father," said the captain. "Two went out, and two return.All is well!"

　　CHAPTER XXVII

　　THE STAMPING OF THE FIRE

　　On the morrow the impi awoke refreshed with sleep, and, after they hadeaten, Umslopogaas mustered them. Alas! nearly half of those who hadseen the sun of yesterday would wake no more forever. The Slaughterermustered them and thanked them for that which they had done, winningfame and cattle. They were merry, recking little of those who weredead, and sang his praises and the praises of Galazi in a loud song.When the song was ended Umslopogaas spoke to them again, saying thatthe victory was great, and the cattle they had won were countless. Yetsomething was lacking--she was lacking whom he came to seek to be agift to Dingaan the king, and for whose sake this war was made. Wherenow was the Lily? Yesterday she had been here, clad in a moocha like aman and bearing a shield; this he knew from the captives. Where, then,was she now?

　　Then all the soldiers said that they had seen nothing of her. Whenthey had done, Galazi spoke a word, as was agreed between him andUmslopogaas. He said that when they stormed the cave he had seen a manrun at a warrior in the cave to kill him. Then as he came, he who wasabout to be slain threw down the shield and cried for mercy, andGalazi knew that this was no warrior of the Halakazi, but a verybeautiful girl. So he called to the man to let her alone and not totouch her, for the order was that no women should be killed. But thesoldier, being made with the lust of fight, shouted that maid or manshe should die, and slew her. Thereon, he--Galazi--in his wrath ran upand smote the man with the Watcher and killed him also, and he prayedthat he had done no wrong.

　　"You have done well, my brother," said Umslopogaas. "Come now, some ofyou, and let us look at this dead girl. Perhaps it is the Lily, and ifso that is unlucky for us, for I do not know what tale we shall tellto Dingaan of the matter."

　　So the captains went with Umslopogaas and Galazi, and came to the spotwhere the girl had been laid, and by her the man of the People of theAxe.

　　"All is as the Wolf, my brother, has told," said Umslopogaas, wavingthe torch in his hand over the two who lay dead. "Here, without adoubt, lies she who was named the Lily, whom we came to win, and byher that fool who slew her, slain himself by the blow of the Watcher.An ill sight to see, and an ill tale for me to tell at the kraal ofDingaan. Still, what is is, and cannot be altered; and this maid whowas the fairest of the fair is now none to lovely to look on. Let usaway!" And he turned swiftly, then spoke again, saying:--

　　"Bind up this dead girl in ox hides, cover her with salt, and let herbe brought with us." And they did so.

　　Then the captains said: "Surely it is so, my father; now it cannot bealtered, and Dingaan must miss his bride." So said they all exceptthat man who had been captain of the guard when Umslopogaas and Galaziand another passed through the archway. This man, indeed, saidnothing, yet he was not without his thoughts. For it seemed to himthat he had seen three pass through the archway, and not two. Itseemed to him, moreover, that the kaross which the third wore hadslipped aside as she pressed past him, and that beneath it he had seenthe shape of a beautiful woman, and above it had caught the glint of awoman's eye--an eye full and dark, like a buck's.

　　Also, this captain noted that Bulalio called none of the captives toswear to the body of the Lily maid, and that he shook the torch to andfro as he held it over her--he whose hand was of the steadiest. All ofthis he kept in his mind, forgetting nothing.

　　Now it chanced afterwards, on the homeward march, my father, thatUmslopogaas had cause to speak angrily to this man, because he triedto rob another of his share of the spoil of the Halakazi. He spokesharply to him, degrading him from his rank, and setting another overhim. Also he took cattle from the man, and gave them to him whom hewould have robbed.

　　And thereafter, though he was justly served, this man thought more andmore of the third who had passed through the arch of the cave and hadnot returned, and who seemed to him to have a fair woman's shape, andeyes which gleamed like those of a woman.

　　On that day, then, Umslopogaas began his march to the kraalUmgugundhlovu, where Dingaan sat. But before he set his facehomewards, in the presence of the soldiers, he asked Galazi the Wolfif he would come back with him, or if he desired to stay to be chiefof the Halakazi, as he was by right of birth and war. Then the Wolflaughed, and answered that he had come out to seek for vengeance, andnot for the place of a chief, also that there were few of the Halakazipeople left over whom he might rule if he wished. Moreover, he addedthis: that, like twin trees, they two blood-brethren had grown up sideby side till their roots were matted together, and that, were one ofthem dug up and planted in Swazi soil, he feared lest both shouldwither, or, at the last, that he, Galazi, would wither, who loved butone man and certain wolves.

　　So Umslopogaas said no more of the chieftainship, but began hisjourney. With him he brought a great number of cattle, to be a giftfor Dingaan, and a multitude of captives, young women and children,for he would appease the heart of Dingaan, because he did not bringher whom he sought--the Lily, flower of flowers. Yet, because he wascautious and put little faith in the kindness of kings, Umslopogaas,so soon as he reached the borders of Zululand, sent the best of thecattle and the fairest of the maids and children on to the kraal ofthe People of the Axe by the Ghost Mountain. And he who had beencaptain of the guard but now was a common soldier noticed this also.

　　Now it chanced that on a certain morning I, Mopo, sat in the kraalUmgugundhlovu in attendance on Dingaan. For still I waited on theking, though he had spoken no word to me, good or bad, since theyesterday, when I foretold to him that in the blood of the white menwhom he had betrayed grew the flower of his own death. For, my father,it was on the morrow of the slaying of the Amaboona that Umslopogaascame to the kraal Umgugundhlovu.

　　Now the mind of Dingaan was heavy, and he sought something to lightenit. Presently he bethought himself of the white praying man, who hadcome to the kraal seeking to teach us people of the Zulu to worshipother gods than the assegai and the king. Now this was a good man, butno luck went with his teaching, which was hard to understand; and,moreover, the indunas did not like it, because it seemed to set amaster over the master, and a king over the king, and to preach ofpeace to those whose trade was war. Still, Dingaan sent for the whiteman that he might dispute with him, for Dingaan thought that hehimself was the cleverest of all men.

　　Now the white man came, but his face was pale, because of that whichhe had seen befall the Boers, for he was gentle and hated such sights.The king bade him be seated and spoke to him saying:--

　　"The other day, O White Man, thou toldest me of a place of firewhither those go after death who have done wickedly in life. Tell menow of thy wisdom, do my fathers lie in that place?"

　　"How can I know, King," answered the prayer-doctor, "who may not judgeof the deeds of men? This I say only: that those who murder and roband oppress the innocent and bear false witness shall lie in thatplace of fire."

　　"It seems that my fathers have done all these things, and if they arein this place I would go there also, for I am minded to be with myfathers at the last. Yet I think that I should find a way to escape ifever I came there."

　　"How, King?"

　　Now Dingaan had set this trap for the prayer-doctor. In the centre ofthat open space where he had caused the Boers to be fallen upon he hadbuilt up a great pyre of wood--brushwood beneath, and on top of thebrushwood logs, and even whole trees. Perhaps, my father, there weresixty full wagonloads of dry wood piled together there in the centreof the place.

　　"Thou shalt see with thine eyes, White Man," he answered, and biddingattendants set fire to the pile all round, he summoned that regimentof young men which was left in the kraal. Maybe there were a thousandand half a thousand of them--not more--the same that had slain theBoers.

　　Now the fire began to burn fiercely, and the regiment filed in andtook its place in ranks. By the time that all had come, the pyre waseverywhere a sheet of raging flame, and, though we sat a hundred pacesfrom it, its heat was great when the wind turned our way.

　　"Now, Doctor of Prayers, is thy hot place hotter than yonder fire?"said the king.

　　He answered that he did not know, but the fire was certainly hot.

　　"Then I will show thee how I will come out of it if ever I go to liein such a fire--ay, though it be ten times as big and fierce. Ho! mychildren!" he cried to the soldiers, and, springing up, "You seeyonder fire. Run swiftly and stamp it flat with your feet. Where therewas fire let there be blackness and ashes."

　　Now the White Man lifted his hands and prayed Dingaan not to do thisthing that should be the death of many, but the king bade him besilent. Then he turned his eyes upward and prayed to his gods. For amoment also the soldiers looked on each other in doubt, for the fireraged furiously, and spouts of flame shot high toward the heaven, andabove it and about it the hot air danced. But their captain called tothem loudly: "Great is the king! Hear the words of the king, whohonours you! Yesterday we ate up the Amaboona--it was nothing, theywere unarmed. There is a foe more worthy of our valour. Come, mychildren, let us wash in the fire--we who are fiercer than the fire!Great is the king who honours us!"

　　Thus he spoke and ran forward, and, with a roar, after him sprang thesoldiers, rank by rank. They were brave men indeed; moreover, theyknew that if death lay before them death also awaited him who laggedbehind, and it is far better to die with honour than ashamed. On theywent, as to the joy of battle, their captain leading them, and as theywent they sang the Ingomo, the war-chant of the Zulu. Now the captainneared the raging fire; we saw him lift his shield to keep off itsheat. Then he was gone--he had sprung into the heart of the furnace,and but little of him was ever found again. After him went the firstcompany. In they went, beating at the flames with their ox-hideshields, stamping them out with their naked feet, tearing down theburning logs and casting them aside. Not one man of that companylived, my father; they fell down like moths which flutter through acandle, and where they fell they perished. But after them came othercompanies, and it was well for those in this fight who were last tograpple with the foe. Now a great smoke was mixed with the flame, nowthe flame grew less and less, and the smoke more and more; and nowblackened men, hairless, naked, and blistered, white with thescorching of the fire, staggered out on the farther side of theflames, falling to earth here and there. After them came others; nowthere was no flame, only a great smoke in which men moved dimly; andpresently, my father, it was done: they had conquered the fire, andthat with but very little hurt to the last seven companies, thoughevery man had trodden it. How many perished?--nay, I know not, theywere never counted; but what between the dead and the injured thatregiment was at half strength till the king drafted more men into it.

　　"See, Doctor of Prayers," said Dingaan, with a laugh, "thus shall Iescape the fires of that land of which thou tellest, if such there beindeed: I will bid my impis stamp them out."

　　Then the praying man went from the kraal saying that he would teach nomore among the Zulus, and afterwards he left the land. When he hadgone the burnt wood and the dead were cleared away, the injured weredoctored or killed according to their hurts, and those who had littleharm came before the king and praised him.

　　"New shields and headresses must be found for you, my children," saidDingaan, for the shields were black and shrivelled, and of heads ofhair and plumes there were but few left among that regiment.

　　"Wow!" said Dingaan again, looking at the soldiers who still lived:"shaving will be easy and cheap in that place of fire of which thewhite man speaks."

　　Then he ordered bear to be brought to the men, for the heat had madethem thirsty.

　　Now though you may not guess it, my father, I have told you this talebecause it has something to do with my story; for scarcely had thematter been ended when messengers came, saying that Bulalio, chief ofthe People of the Axe, and his impi were without, having returned withmuch spoil from the slaying of the Halakazi in Swaziland. Now when Iheard this my heart leapt for joy, seeing that I had feared greatlyfor the fate of Umslopogaas, my fosterling. Dingaan also was veryglad, and, springing up, danced to and fro like a child.

　　"Now at last we have good tidings," he said, at once forgetting thestamping of the fire, "and now shall my eyes behold that Lily whom myhand has longed to pluck. Let Bulalio and his people enter swiftly."

　　For awhile there was silence; then from far away, without the highfence of the great place, there came a sound of singing, and throughthe gates of the kraal rushed two great men, wearing black plumes upontheir heads, having black shields in their left hands, and in theirright, one an axe and one a club; while about their shoulders werebound wolf-skins. They ran low, neck and neck, with outstretchedshields and heads held forward, as a buck runs when he is hard pressedby dogs, and no such running had been seen in the kraal Umgugundhlovuas the running of the Wolf-Brethren. Half across the space they ran,and halted suddenly, and, as they halted, the dead ashes of the fireflew up before their feet in a little cloud.

　　"By my head! look, these come armed before me!" said Dingaan,frowning, "and to do this is death. Now say who is that man, great andfierce, who bears an axe aloft? Did I not know him dead I should sayit was the Black One, my brother, as he was in the days of the smitingof Zwide: so was his head set on his shoulders and so he was wont tolook round, like a lion."

　　"I think that is Bulalio the Slaughterer, chief of the People of theAxe, O King," I answered.

　　"And who is the other with him? He is a great man also. Never have Iseen such a pair!"

　　"I think that is Galazi the Wolf, he who is blood-brother to theSlaughterer, and his general," I said again.

　　Now after these two came the soldiers of the People of the Axe, armedwith short sticks alone. Four by four they came, all holding theirheads low, and with black shields outstretched, and formed themselvesinto companies behind the Wolf-Brethren, till all were there. Then,after them, the crowd of the Halakazi slaves were driven in,--women,boys, and maids, a great number--and they stood behind the rankshuddled together like frightened calves.

　　"A gallant sight, truly!" said Dingaan, as he looked upon thecompanies of black-plumed and shielded warriors. "I have no bettersoldiers in my impis, and yet my eyes behold these for the firsttime," and again he frowned.

　　Now suddenly Umslopogaas lifted his axe and started forward at fullspeed, and after him thundered the companies. On they rushed, andtheir plumes lay back upon the wind, till it seemed as though theymust stamp us flat. But when he was within ten paces of the kingUmslopogaas lifted Groan-Maker again, and Galazi held the Watcher onhigh, and every man halted where he was, while once more the dust flewup in clouds. They halted in long, unbroken lines, with outstretchedshields and heads held low; no man's head rose more than the length ofa dance kerrie from the earth. So they stood one minute, then, for thethird time, Umslopogaas lifted Groan-Maker, and in an instant everyman straightened himself, each shield was tossed on high, and fromevery throat was roared the royal salute, "Bayete!"

　　"A pretty sight forsooth," quoth Dingaan; "but these soldiers are toowell drilled who have never done me service nor the Black One who wasbefore me, and this Slaughterer is too good a captain, I say. Comehither, ye twain!" he cried aloud.

　　Then the Wolf-Brethren strode forward and stood before the king, andfor awhile they looked upon each other.

　　CHAPTER XXVIII

　　THE LILY IS BROUGHT TO DINGAAN

　　"How are you named?" said Dingaan.

　　"We are named Bulalio the Slaughterer and Galazi the Wolf, O King,"answered Umslopogaas.

　　"Was it thou who didst send a certain message to the Black One who isdead, Bulalio?"

　　"Yea, O King, I sent a message, but from all I have heard, Masilo, mymessenger, gave more than the message, for he stabbed the Black One.Masilo had an evil heart."

　　Now Dingaan winced, for he knew well that he himself and one Mopo hadstabbed the Black One, but he thought that this outland chief had notheard the tale, so he said no more of the message.

　　"How is it that ye dare to come before me armed? Know ye not the rulethat he who appears armed before the king dies?"

　　"We have not heard that law, O King," said Umslopogaas. "Moreover,there is this to be told: my virtue of the axe I bear I rule alone. IfI am seen without the axe, then any man may take my place who can, forthe axe is chieftainess of the People of the Axe, and he who holds itis its servant."

　　"A strange custom," said Dingaan, "but let it pass. And thou, Wolf,what hast thou to say of that great club of thine?"

　　"There is this to be told of the club, O King," answered Galazi: "byvirtue of the club I guard my life. If I am seen without the club,then may any man take my life who can, for the club is my Watcher, notI Watcher of the club."

　　"Never wast thou nearer to the losing of both club and life," saidDingaan, angrily.

　　"It may be so, O King," answered the Wolf. "When the hour is, then,without a doubt, the Watcher shall cease from his watching."

　　"Ye are a strange pair," quoth Dingaan. "Where have you been now, andwhat is your business at the Place of the Elephant?"

　　"We have been in a far country, O King!" answered Umslopogaas. "Wehave wandered in a distant land to search for a Flower to be a gift toa king, and in our searching we have trampled down a Swazi garden, andyonder are some of those who tended it"--and he pointed to thecaptives--"and without are the cattle that ploughed it."

　　"Good, Slaughterer! I see the gardeners, and I hear the lowing of thecattle, but what of the Flower? Where is this Flower ye went so far todig in Swazi soil? Was it a Lily-bloom, perchance?"

　　"It was a Lily-bloom, O King! and yet, alas! the Lily has withered.Nothing is left but the stalk, white and withered as are the bones ofmen."

　　"What meanest thou?" said Dingaan, starting to his feet.

　　"That the king shall learn," answered Umslopogaas; and, turning, hespoke a word to the captains who were behind him. Presently the ranksopened up, and four men ran forward from the rear of the companies. Ontheir shoulders they bore a stretcher, and upon the stretcher laysomething wrapped about with raw ox-hides, and bound round withrimpis. The men saluted, and laid their burden down before the king.

　　"Open!" said the Slaughterer; and they opened, and there within thehides, packed in salt, lay the body of a girl who once was tall andfair."

　　"Here lies the Lily's stalk, O King!" said Umslopogaas, pointing withthe axe, "but if her flower blooms on any air, it is not here."

　　Now Dingaan stared at the sight of death, and bitterness of heart tookhold of him, since he desired above all things to win the beauty ofthe Lily for himself.

　　"Bear away this carrion and cast it to the dogs!" he cried, for thushe could speak of her whom he would have taken to wife, when once hedeemed her dead. "Take it away, and thou, Slaughterer, tell me how itcame about that the maid was slain. It will be well for thee if thouhast a good answer, for know thy life hangs on the words."

　　So Umslopogaas told the king all that tale which had been made readyagainst the wrath of Dingaan. And when he had finished Galazi told hisstory, of how he had seen the soldier kill the maid, and in his wrathhad killed the soldier. Then certain of the captains who had seen thesoldier and the maid lying in one death came forward and spoke to it.

　　Now Dingaan was very angry, and yet there was nothing to be done. TheLily was dead, and by no fault of any except of one, who was also deadand beyond his reach.

　　"Get you hence, you and your people," he said to the Wolf-Brethren. "Itake the cattle and the captives. Be thankful that I do not take allyour lives also--first, because ye have dared to make war without myword, and secondly, because, having made war, ye have so brought itabout that, though ye bring me the body of her I sought, ye do notbring the life."

　　Now when the king spoke of taking the lives of all the People of theAxe, Umslopogaas smiled grimly and glanced at his companies. Thensaluting the king, he turned to go. But as he turned a man sprangforwards from the ranks and called to Dingaan, saying:--

　　"Is it granted that I may speak truth before the king, and afterwardssleep in the king's shadow?"

　　Now this was that man who had been captain of the guard on the nightwhen three passed out through the archway and two returned, that sameman whom Umslopogaas had degraded from his rank.

　　"Speak on, thou art safe," answered Dingaan.

　　"O King, thy ears have been filled with lies," said the soldier."Hearken, O King! I was captain of the guard of the gate on that nightof the slaying of the Halakazi. Three came to the gate of the mountain--they were Bulalio, the Wolf Galazi, and another. That other was talland slim, bearing a shield high--so. As the third passed the gate, thekaross he wore brushed against me and slipped aside. Beneath thatkaross was no man's breast, O King, but the shape of a woman, almostwhite in colour, and very fair. In drawing back the kaross this thirdone moved the shield. Behind that shield was no man's face, O King,but the face of a girl, lovelier than the moon, and having eyesbrighter than the stars. Three went out at the mountain gate, O King,only two returned, and, peeping after them, it seemed that I saw thethird running swiftly across the plains, as a young maid runs, O King.This also, Elephant, Bulalio yonder denied me when, as captain of theguard, I asked for the third who had passed the gate, saying that onlytwo had passed. Further, none of the captives were called to swear tothe body of the maid, and now it is too late, and that man who laybeside her was not killed by Galazi in the cave. He was killed outsidethe cave by a blow of a Halakazi kerrie. I saw him fall with my owneyes, and slew the man who smote him. One thing more, King of theWorld, the best of the captives and the cattle are not here for a giftto thee--they are at the kraal of Bulalio, Chief of the People of theAxe. I have spoken, O King, yes, because my heart loves not lies. Ihave spoken the truth, and now do thou protect me from these Wolf-Brethren, O King, for they are very fierce."

　　Now all this while that the traitor told his tale Umslopogaas, inch byinch, was edging near to him and yet nearer, till at length he mighthave touched him with an outstretched spear. None noted him except I,Mopo, alone, and perhaps Galazi, for all were watching the face ofDingaan as men watch a storm that is about to burst.

　　"Fear thou not the Wolf-Brethren, soldier," gasped Dingaan, rollinghis red eyes; "the paw of the Lion guards thee, my servant."

　　Ere the words had left the king's lips the Slaughterer leapt. Heleaped full on to the traitor, speaking never a word, and oh! his eyeswere awful. He leaped upon him, he seized him with his hands, liftingno weapon, and in his terrible might he broke him as a child breaks astick--nay, I know not how, it was too swift to see. He broke him,and, hurling him on high, cast him dead at the feet of Dingaan, cryingin a great voice:--

　　"Take thy servant, King! Surely he 'sleeps in thy shadow'!"

　　Then there was silence, only through the silence was heard a gasp offear and wonder, for no such deed as this had been wrought in thepresence of the king--no, not since the day of Senzangacona the Root.

　　Now Dingaan spoke, and his voice came thick with rage, and his limbstrembled.

　　"Slay him!" he hissed. "Slay the dog and all those with him!"

　　"Now we come to a game which I can play," answered Umslopogaas. "Ho,People of the Axe! Will you stand to be slaughtered by these singedrats?" and he pointed with Groan-Maker at those warriors who hadescaped without hurt in the fire, but whose faces the fire hadscorched.

　　Then for answer a great shout went up, a shout and a roar of laughter.And this was the shout:--

　　"No, Slaughterer, not so are we minded!" and right and left they facedto meet the foe, while from all along the companies came the cracklingof the shaken shields.

　　Back sprang Umslopogaas to head his men; forward leaped the soldiersof the king to work the king's will, if so they might. And Galazi theWolf also sprang forward, towards Dingaan, and, as he sprang, swung upthe Watcher, crying in a great voice:--

　　"Hold!"

　　Again there was silence, for men saw that the shadow of the Watcherlay dark upon the head of Dingaan.

　　"It is a pity that many should die when one will suffice," cried theWolf again. "Let a blow be struck, and where his shadow lies thereshall the Watcher be, and lo! the world will lack a king. A word,King!"

　　Now Dingaan looked up at the great man who stood above him, and feltthe shadow of the shining club lie cold upon his brow, and again heshook--this time it was with fear.

　　"Begone in peace!" he said.

　　"A good word for thee, King," said the Wolf, grinning, and slowly hedrew himself backwards towards the companies, saying, "Praise theking! The king bids his children go in peace."

　　But when Dingaan felt that his brow was no longer cold with the shadowof death his rage came back to him, and he would have called to thesoldiers to fall upon the People of the Axe, only I stayed him,saying:--

　　"Thy death is in it, O King; the Slaughterer will grind such men asthou hast here beneath his feet, and then once more shall the Watcherlook upon thee."

　　Now Dingaan saw that this was true, and gave no command, for he hadonly those men with him whom the fire had left. All the rest were goneto slaughter the Boers in Natal. Still, he must have blood, so heturned on me.

　　"Thou art a traitor, Mopo, as I have known for long, and I will servethee as yonder dog served his faithless servant!" and he thrust at mewith the assegai in his hand.

　　But I saw the stroke, and, springing high into the air, avoided it.Then I turned and fled very swiftly, and after me came certain of thesoldiers. The way was not far to the last company of the People of theAxe; moreover, it saw me coming, and, headed by Umslopogaas, whowalked behind them all, ran to meet me. Then the soldiers who followedto kill me hung back out of reach of the axe.

　　"Here with the king is no place for me any more, my son," I said toUmslopogaas.

　　"Fear not, my father, I will find you a place," he answered.

　　Then I called a message to the soldiers who followed me, saying:--

　　"Tell this to the king: that he has done ill to drive me from him, forI, Mopo, set him on the throne and I alone can hold him there. Tellhim this also, that he will do yet worse to seek me where I am, forthat day when we are once more face to face shall be his day of death.Thus speaks Mopo the inyanga, Mopo the doctor, who never yetprophesied that which should not be."

　　Then we marched from the kraal Umgugundhlovu, and when next I saw thatkraal it was to burn all of it which Dingaan had left unburnt, andwhen next I saw Dingaan--ah! that is to be told of, my father.

　　We marched from the kraal, none hindering us, for there were none tohinder, and after we had gone a little way Umslopogaas halted andsaid:--

　　"Now it is in my mind to return whence we came and slay this Dingaan,ere he slay me."

　　"Yet it is well to leave a frightened lion in his thicket, my son, fora lion at bay is hard to handle. Doubt not that every man, young andold, in Umgugundhlovu now stands armed about the gates, lest such athought should take you, my son; and though just now he was afraid,yet Dingaan will strike for his life. When you might have killed youdid not kill; now the hour has gone."

　　"Wise words!" said Galazi. "I would that the Watcher had fallen wherehis shadow fell."

　　"What is your counsel now, father?" asked Umslopogaas.

　　"This, then: that you two should abide no more beneath the shadow ofthe Ghost Mountain, but should gather your people and your cattle, andpass to the north on the track of Mosilikatze the Lion, who broke awayfrom Chaka. There you may rule apart or together, and never dream ofDingaan."

　　"I will not do that, father," he answered. "I will dwell beneath theshadow of the Ghost Mountain while I may."

　　"And so will I," said Galazi, "or rather among its rocks. What! shallmy wolves lack a master when they would go a-hunting? Shall Greysnoutand Blackfang, Blood and Deathgrip, and their company black and grey,howl for me in vain?"

　　"So be it, children. Ye are young and will not listen to the counselof the old. Let it befall as it chances."

　　I spoke thus, for I did not know then why Umslopogaas would not leavehis kraals. It was for this reason: because he had bidden Nada to meethim there.

　　Afterwards, when he found her he would have gone, but then the sky wasclear, the danger-clouds had melted for awhile.

　　Oh! that Umslopogaas my fosterling had listened to me! Now he wouldhave reigned as a king, not wandered an outcast in strange lands Iknow not where; and Nada should have lived, not died, nor would thePeople of the Axe have ceased to be a people.

　　This of Dingaan. When he heard my message he grew afraid once more,for he knew me to be no liar.

　　Therefore he held his hand for awhile, sending no impi to smiteUmslopogaas, lest it might come about that I should bring him hisdeath as I had promised. And before the fear had worn away, ithappened that Dingaan's hands were full with the war against theAmaboona, because of his slaughter of the white people, and he had nosoldiers to spare with whom to wreak vengeance on a petty chief livingfar away.

　　Yet his rage was great because of what had chanced, and, after hiscustom, he murdered many innocent people to satisfy it.

　　CHAPTER XXIX

　　MOPO TELLS HIS TALE

　　Now afterwards, as we went upon our road, Umslopogaas told me allthere was to tell of the slaying of the Halakazi and of the finding ofNada.

　　When I heard that Nada, my daughter, still lived, I wept for joy,though like Umslopogaas I was torn by doubt and fear, for it is farfor an unaided maid to travel from Swaziland to the Ghost Mountain.Yet all this while I said nothing to Umslopogaas of the truth as tohis birth, because on the journey there were many around us, and thevery trees have ears, and the same wind to which we whispered mightwhisper to the king. Still I knew that the hour had come now when Imust speak, for it was in my mind to bring it about that Umslopogaasshould be proclaimed the son of Chaka, and be made king of the Zulusin the place of Dingaan, his uncle. Yet all these things had gonecross for us, because it was fated so, my father. Had I known thatUmslopogaas still lived when I slew Chaka, then I think that I couldhave brought it about that he should be king. Or had things fallen outas I planned, and the Lily maid been brought to Dingaan, andUmslopogaas grew great in his sight, then, perhaps, I could havebrought it about. But all things had gone wrong. The Lily was noneother than Nada; and how could Umslopogaas give Nada, whom he thoughthis sister, and who was my daughter, to Dingaan against her will?Also, because of Nada, Dingaan and Umslopogaas were now at bitterenmity, and for this same cause I was disgraced and a fugitive, and mycounsels would no longer be heard in the ear of the king.

　　So everything must be begun afresh: and as I walked with the impitowards the Ghost Mountain, I thought much and often of the manner inwhich this might be done. But as yet I said nothing.

　　Now at last we were beneath the Ghost Mountain, and looked upon theface of the old Witch who sits there aloft forever waiting for theworld to die; and that same night we came to the kraal of the Peopleof the Axe, and entered it with a great singing. But Galazi did notenter at that time; he was away to the mountain to call his flock ofwolves, and as we passed its foot we heard the welcome that the wolveshowled in greeting to him.

　　Now as we drew near the kraal, all the women and children came out tomeet us, headed by Zinita, the head wife of Umslopogaas. They camejoyfully, but when they found how many were wanting who a moon beforehad gone thence to fight, their joy was turned to mourning, and thevoice of their weeping went up to heaven.

　　Umslopogaas greeted Zinita kindly; and yet I thought that there wassomething lacking. At first she spoke to him softly, but when shelearned all that had come to pass, her words were not soft, for shereviled me and sang a loud song at Umslopogaas.

　　"See now, Slaughterer," she said, "see now what has came about becauseyou listened to this aged fool!"--that was I, my father--"this foolwho calls himself 'Mouth'! Ay, a mouth he is, a mouth out of whichproceed folly and lies! What did he counsel you to do?--to go upagainst these Halakazi and win a girl for Dingaan! And what have youdone?--you have fallen upon the Halakazi, and doubtless have killedmany innocent people with that great axe of yours, also you have leftnearly half of the soldiers of the Axe to whiten in the Swazi caves,and in exchange have brought back certain cattle of a small breed, andgirls and children whom we must nourish!

　　"Nor does the matter end here. You went, it seems, to win a girl whomDingaan desired, yet when you find that girl you let her go, because,indeed, you say she was your sister and would not wed Dingaan.Forsooth, is not the king good enough for this sister of yours? Nowwhat is the end of the tale? You try to play tricks on the king,because of your sister, and are found out. Then you kill a man beforeDingaan and escape, bringing this fool of an aged Mouth with you, thathe may teach you his own folly. So you have lost half of your men, andyou have gained the king for a foe who shall bring about the death ofall of us, and a fool for a councillor. Wow! Slaughterer, keep to yourtrade and let others find you wit."

　　Thus she spoke without ceasing, and there was some truth in her words.Zinita had a bitter tongue. I sat silent till she had finished, andUmslopogaas also remained silent, though his anger was great, becausethere was no crack in her talk through which a man might thrust aword.

　　"Peace, woman!" I said at length, "do not speak ill of those who arewise and who had seen much before you were born."

　　"Speak no ill of him who is my father," growled Umslopogaas. "Ay!though you do not know it, this Mouth whom you revile is Mopo, myfather."

　　"Then there is a man among the People of the Axe who has a fool for afather. Of all tidings this is the worst."

　　"There is a man among the People of the Axe who has a jade and a scoldfor a wife," said Umslopogaas, springing up. "Begone, Zinita!--andknow this, that if I hear you snarl such words of him who is myfather, you shall go further than your own hut, for I will put youaway and drive you from my kraal. I have suffered you too long."

　　"I go," said Zinita. "Oh! I am well served! I made you chief, and nowyou threaten to put me away."

　　"My own hands made me chief," said Umslopogaas, and, springing up, hethrust her from the hut.

　　"It is a poor thing to be wedded to such a woman, my father," he saidpresently.

　　"Yes, a poor thing, Umslopogaas, yet these are the burdens that menmust bear. Learn wisdom from it, Umslopogaas, and have as little to dowith women as may be; at the least, do not love them overmuch, soshall you find the more peace." Thus I spoke, smiling, and would thathe had listened to my counsel, for it is the love of women which hasbrought ruin on Umslopogaas!

　　All this was many years ago, and but lately I have heard thatUmslopogaas is fled into the North, and become a wanderer to his deathbecause of the matter of a woman who had betrayed him, making it seemthat he had murdered one Loustra, who was his blood brother, just asGalazi had been. I do not know how it came about, but he who was sofierce and strong had that weakness like his uncle Dingaan, and it hasdestroyed him at the last, and for this cause I shall behold him nomore.

　　Now, my father, for awhile we were silent and alone in the hut, and aswe sat I thought I heard a rat stir in the thatch.

　　Then I spoke. "Umslopogaas, at length the hour has come that I shouldwhisper something into your ear, a word which I have held secret eversince you were born."

　　"Speak on, my father," he said, wondering.

　　I crept to the door of the hut and looked out. The night was dark andI could see none about, and could hear no one move, yet, beingcautious, I walked round the hut. Ah, my father, when you have asecret to tell, be not so easily deceived. It is not enough to lookforth and to peer round. Dig beneath the floor, and search the roofalso; then, having done all this, go elsewhere and tell your tale. Thewoman was right: I was but a fool, for all my wisdom and my whitehairs. Had I not been a fool I would have smoked out that rat in thethatch before ever I opened my lips. For the rat was Zinita, my father--Zinita, who had climbed the hut, and now lay there in the dark, herear upon the smoke-hole, listening to every word that passed. It was awicked thing to do, and, moreover, the worst of omens, but there islittle honour among women when they learn that which others wish tohide away from them, nor, indeed, do they then weight omens.

　　So having searched and found nothing, I spoke to Umslopogaas, myfosterling, not knowing that death in a woman's shape lay on the hutabove us. "Hearken," I said, "you are no son of mine, Umslopogaas,though you have called me father from a babe. You spring from aloftier stock, Slaughterer."

　　"Yet I was well pleased with my fathering, old man," said Umslopogaas."The breed is good enough for me. Say, then, whose son am I?"

　　Now I bent forward and whispered to him, yet, alas! not low enough."You are the son of the Black One who is dead, yea, sprung from theblood of Chaka and of Baleka, my sister."

　　"I still have some kinship with you then, Mopo, and that I am glad of.Wow! who would have guessed that I was the son of the Silwana, of thathyena man? Perhaps it is for this reason that, like Galazi, I love thecompany of the wolves, though no love grows in my heart for my fatheror any of his house."

　　"You have little cause to love him, Umslopogaas, for he murdered yourmother, Baleka, and would have slain you also. But you are the son ofChaka and of no other man."

　　"Well, his eyes must be keen indeed, my uncle, who can pick his ownfather out of a crowd. And yet I once heard this tale before, though Ihad long forgotten it."

　　"From whom did you hear it, Umslopogaas? An hour since, it was knownto one alone, the others are dead who knew it. Now it is known to two"--ah! my father, I did not guess of the third;--"from whom, then, didyou hear it?"

　　"It was from the dead; at least, Galazi the Wolf heard it from thedead One who sat in the cave on Ghost Mountain, for the dead One toldhim that a man would come to be his brother who should be namedUmslopogaas Bulalio, son of Chaka, and Galazi repeated it to me, but Ihad long forgotten it."

　　"It seems that there is wisdom among the dead," I answered, "for lo!to-day you are named Umslopogaas Bulalio, and to-day I declare you theson of Chaka. But listen to my tale."

　　Then I told him all the story from the hour of his birth onwards, andwhen I spoke of the words of his mother, Baleka, after I had told mydream to her, and of the manner of her death by the command of Chaka,and of the great fashion in which she had died, then, I say,Umslopogaas wept, who, I think, seldom wept before or after. But as mytale drew it its end I saw that he listened ill, as a man listens whohas a weightier matter pressing on his heart, and before it was welldone he broke in:--

　　"So, Mopo, my uncle, if I am the son of Chaka and Baleka, Nada theLily is no sister to me."

　　"Nay, Umslopogaas, she is only your cousin."

　　"Over near of blood," he said; "yet that shall not stand between us,"and his face grew glad.

　　I looked at him in question.

　　"You grow dull, my uncle. This is my meaning: that I will marry Nadaif she still lives, for it comes upon me now that I have never lovedany woman as I love Nada the Lily," and while he spoke, I heard therat stir in the thatch of the hut.

　　"Wed her if you will, Umslopogaas," I answered, "yet I think that oneZinita, your Inkosikasi, will find words to say in the matter."

　　"Zinita is my head wife indeed, but shall she hold me back from takingother wives, after the lawful custom of our people?" he asked angrily,and his anger showed that he feared the wrath of Zinita.

　　"The custom is lawful and good," I said, "but it has bred trouble attimes. Zinita can have little to say if she continues in her place andyou still love her as of old. But enough of her. Nada is not yet atyour gates, and perhaps she will never find them. See, Umslopogaas, itis my desire that you should rule in Zululand by right of blood, and,though things point otherwise, yet I think a way can be found to bringit about."

　　"How so?" he asked.

　　"Thus: Many of the great chiefs who are friends to me hate Dingaan andfear him, and did they know that a son of Chaka lived, and that sonthe Slaughterer, he well might climb to the throne upon theirshoulders. Also the soldiers love the name of Chaka, though he dealtcruelly with them, because at least he was brave and generous. Butthey do not love Dingaan, for his burdens are the burdens of Chaka buthis gifts are the gifts of Dingaan; therefore they would welcomeChaka's son if once they knew him for certain. But it is here that thenecklet chafes, for there is but my word to prove it. Yet I will try."

　　"Perhaps it is worth trying and perhaps it is not, my uncle," answeredUmslopogaas. "One thing I know: I had rather see Nada at my gates to-night than hear all the chiefs in the land crying 'Hail, O King!'"

　　"You will live to think otherwise, Umslopogaas; and now spies must beset at the kraal Umgugundhlovu to give us warning of the mind of theking, lest he should send an impi suddenly to eat you up. Perhaps hishands may be too full for that ere long, for those white Amaboona willanswer his assegais with bullets. And one more word: let nothing besaid of this matter of your birth, least of all to Zinita your wife,or to any other woman."

　　"Fear not, uncle," he answered; "I know how to be silent."

　　Now after awhile Umslopogaas left me and went to the hut of Zinita,his Inkosikasi, where she lay wrapped in her blankets, and, as itseemed, asleep.

　　"Greeting, my husband," she said slowly, like one who wakens. "I havedreamed a strange dream of you. I dreamed that you were called a king,and that all the regiments of the Zulus filed past giving you theroyal salute, Bayete."

　　Umslopogaas looked at her wondering, for he did not know if she hadlearned something or if this was an omen. "Such dreams are dangerous,"he said, "and he who dreams them does well to lock them fast till theybe forgotten."

　　"Or fulfilled," said Zinita, and again Umslopogaas looked at herwondering.

　　Now after this night I began my work, for I established spies at thekraal of Dingaan, and from them I learned all that passed with theking.

　　At first he gave orders that an impi should be summoned to eat up thePeople of the Axe, but afterwards came tidings that the Boers, to thenumber of five hundred mounted men, were marching on the kraalUmgugundhlovu. So Dingaan had no impi to spare to send to the GhostMountain, and we who were beneath its shadow dwelt there in peace.

　　This time for Boers were beaten, for Bogoza, the spy, led them into anambush; still few were killed, and they did but draw back that theymight jump the further, and Dingaan knew this. At this time also theEnglish white men of Natal, the people of George, who attacked Dingaanby the Lower Tugela, were slain by our soldiers, and those with them.

　　Also, by the help of certain witch-doctors, I filled the land withrumours, prophecies, and dark sayings, and I worked cunningly on theminds of many chiefs that were known to me, sending them messageshardly to be understood, such as should prepare their thoughts for thecoming of one who should be declared to them. They listened, but thetask was long, for the men dwelt far apart, and some of them were awaywith the regiments.

　　So the time went by, till many days had passed since we reached theGhost Mountain. Umslopogaas had no more words with Zinita, but shealways watched him, and he went heavily. For he awaited Nada, and Nadadid not come.

　　But at length Nada came.

　　CHAPTER XXX

　　THE COMING OF NADA

　　One night--it was a night of full moon--I sat alone with Umslopogaasin my hut, and we spoke of the matter of our plots; then, when we hadfinished that talk, we spoke of Nada the Lily.

　　"Alas! my uncle," said Umslopogaas sadly, "we shall never look more onNada; she is surely dead or in bonds, otherwise she had been here longago. I have sought far and wide, and can hear no tidings and findnothing."

　　"All that is hidden is not lost," I answered, yet I myself believedthat there was an end of Nada.

　　Then we were silent awhile, and presently, in the silence, a dogbarked. We rose, and crept out of the hut to see what it might be thatstirred, for the night drew on, and it was needful to be wary, since adog might bark at the stirring of a leaf, or perhaps it might be thedistant footfall of an impi that it heard.

　　We had not far to look, for standing gazing at the huts, like one whois afraid to call, was a tall slim man, holding an assegai in one handand a little shield in the other. We could not see the face of theman, because the light was behind him, and a ragged blanket hung abouthis shoulders. Also, he was footsore, for he rested on one leg. Now wewere peering round the hut, and its shadow hid us, so that the man sawnothing. For awhile he stood still, then he spoke to himself, and hisvoice was strangely soft.

　　"Here are many huts," said the voice, "now how may I know which is thehouse of my brother? Perhaps if I call I shall bring soldiers to me,and be forced to play the man before them, and I am weary of that.Well, I will lie here under the fence till morning; it is a softer bedthan some I have found, and I am word out with travel--sleep I must,"and the figure sighed and turned so that the light of the moon fellfull upon its face.

　　My father, it was the face of Nada, my daughter, whom I had not seenfor so many years, yet across the years I knew it at once; yes, thoughthe bud had become a flower I knew it. The face was weary and worn,but ah! it was beautiful, never before nor since have I seen suchbeauty, for there was this about the loveliness of my daughter, theLily: it seemed to flow from within--yes, as light will flow throughthe thin rind of a gourd, and in that she differed from the otherwomen of our people, who, when they are fair are fair with the fleshalone.

　　Now my heart went out to Nada as she stood in the moonlight, oneforsaken, not having where to lay her head, Nada, who alone was leftalive of all my children. I motioned to Umslopogaas to hide himself inthe shadow, and stepped forward.

　　"Ho!" I said roughly, "who are you, wanderer, and what do you here?"

　　Now Nada started like a frightened bird, but quickly gathered up herthoughts, and turned upon me in a lordly way.

　　"Who are you that ask me?" she said, feigning a man's voice.

　　"One who can use a stick upon thieves and night-prowlers, boy. Come,show your business or be moving. You are not of this people; surelythat moocha is of a Swazi make, and here we do not love Swazis."

　　"Were you not old, I would beat you for your insolence," said Nada,striving to look brave and all the while searching a way to escape."Also, I have no stick, only a spear, and that is for warriors, notfor an old umfagozan like you." Ay, my father, I lived to hear mydaughter name me an umfagozan--a low fellow!

　　Now making pretence to be angry, I leaped at her with my kerrie up,and, forgetting her courage, she dropped her spear, and uttered alittle scream. But she still held the shield before her face. I seizedher by the arm, and struck a blow upon the shield with my kerrie--itwould scarcely have crushed a fly, but this brave warrior trembledsorely.

　　"Where now is your valour, you who name my umfagozan?" I said: "youwho cry like a maid and whose arm is soft as a maid's."

　　She made no answer, but hugged her tattered blanket round her, andshifting my grip from her arm, I seized it and rent it, showing herbreast and shoulder; then I let her go, laughing, and said:--

　　"Lo! here is the warrior that would beat an old umfagozan for hisinsolence, a warrior well shaped for war! Now, my pretty maid whowander at night in the garment of a man, what tale have you to tell?Swift with it, lest I drag you to the chief as his prize! The old manseeks a new wife, they tell me?"

　　Now when Nada saw that I had discovered her she threw down the shieldafter the spear, as a thing that was of no more use, and hung her headsullenly. But when I spoke of dragging her to the chief then she flungherself upon the ground, and clasped my knees, for since I called himold, she thought that this chief could not be Umslopogaas.

　　"Oh, my father," said the Lily, "oh, my father, have pity on me! Yes,yes! I am a girl, a maid--no wife--and you who are old, you, perchancehave daughters such as I, and in their name I ask for pity. My father,I have journeyed far, I have endured many things, to find my way to akraal where my brother rules, and now it seems I have come to thewrong kraal. Forgive me that I spoke to you so, my father; it was buta woman's feint, and I was hard pressed to hide my sex, for my father,you know it is ill to be a lonely girl among strange men."

　　Now I said nothing in answer, for this reason only: that when I heardNada call me father, not knowing me, and saw her clasp my knees andpray to me in my daughter's name, I, who was childless save for her,went nigh to weeping. But she thought that I did not answer herbecause I was angry, and about to drag her to this unknown chief, andimplored me the more even with tears.

　　"My father," she said, "do not this wicked thing by me. Let me go andshow me the path that I shall ask: you who are old, you know that I amtoo fair to be dragged before this chief of yours. Hearken! All I kneware dead, I am alone except for this brother I seek. Oh! if you betrayme may such a fate fall upon your own daughter also! May she also knowthe day of slavery, and the love that she wills not!" and she ceased,sobbing.

　　Now I turned my head and spoke towards the hut, "Chief," I said, "yourEhlose is kind to you to-night, for he has given you a maid fair asthe Lily of the Halakazi"--here Nada glanced up wildly. "Come, then,and take the girl."

　　Now Nada turned to snatch up the assegai from the ground, but whetherto kill me, or the chief she feared so much, or herself, I do notknow, and as she turned, in her woe she called upon the name ofUmslopogaas. She found the assegai, and straightened herself again.And lo! there before her stood a tall chief leaning on an axe; but theold man who threatened her was gone--not very far, in truth, but roundthe corner of the hut.

　　Now Nada the Lily looked, then rubbed her eyes, and looked again.

　　"Surely I dream?" she said at last. "But now I spoke to an old man,and in his place there stands before me the shape of one whom I desireto see."

　　"I thought, Maiden, that the voice of a certain Nada called upon oneUmslopogaas," said he who leaned upon the axe.

　　"Ay, I called: but where is the old man who treated me so scurvily?Nay, what does it matter?--where he is, there let him stop. At least,you are Umslopogaas, my brother, or should be by your greatness andthe axe. To the man I cannot altogether swear in this light; but tothe axe I can swear, for once it passed so very near my eyes."

　　Thus she spoke on, gaining time, and all the while she watchedUmslopogaas till she was sure that it was he and no other. Then sheceased talking, and, flinging herself on him, she kissed him.

　　"Now I trust that Zinita sleeps sound," murmured Umslopogaas, forsuddenly he remembered that Nada was no sister of his, as she thought.

　　Nevertheless, he took her by the hand and said, "Enter, sister. Of allmaidens in the world you are the most welcome here, for know Ibelieved you dead."

　　But I, Mopo, ran into the hut before her, and when she entered shefound me sitting by the fire.

　　"Now, here, my brother," said Nada, pointing at me with her finger,"here is that old umfagozan, that low fellow, who, unless I dream, buta very little while ago brought shame upon me--ay, my brother, hestruck me, a maid, with his kerrie, and that only because I said thatI would stab him for his insolence, and he did worse: he swore that hewould drag me to some old chief of his to be a gift to him, and thishe was about to do, had you not come. Will you suffer these things togo unpunished, my brother?"

　　Now Umslopogaas smiled grimly, and I answered:--

　　"What was it that you called me just now, Nada, when you prayed me toprotect you? Father, was it not?" and I turned my face towards theblaze of the fire, so that the full light fell upon it.

　　"Yes, I called you father, old man. It is not strange, for a homelesswanderer must find fathers where she can--and yet! no, it cannot be--so changed--and that white hand? And yet, oh! who are you? Once therewas a man named Mopo, and he had a little daughter, and she was calledNada--Oh! my father, my father, I know you now!"

　　"Ay, Nada, and I knew you from the first; through all your man'swrappings I knew you after these many years."

　　So the Lily fell upon my neck and sobbed there, and I remember that Ialso wept.

　　Now when she had sobbed her fill of joy, Umslopogaas brought Nada theLily mass to eat and mealie porridge. She ate the curdled milk, butthe porridge she would not eat, saying that she was too weary.

　　Then she told us all the tale of her wanderings since she had fledaway from the side of Umslopogaas at the stronghold of the Halakazi,and it was long, so long that I will not repeat it, for it is a storyby itself. This I will say only: that Nada was captured by robbers,and for awhile passed herself off among them as a youth. But, in theend, they found her out and would have given her as a wife to theirchief, only she persuaded them to kill the chief and make her theirruler. They did this because of that medicine of the eyes which Nadahad only among women, for as she ruled the Halakazi so she ruled therobbers. But, at the last, they all loved her, and she gave it outthat she would wed the strongest. Then some of them fell to fighting,and while they killed each other--for it came about that Nada broughtdeath upon the robbers as on all others--she escaped, for she saidthat she did not wish to look upon their struggle but would await theupshot in a place apart.

　　After that she had many further adventures, but at length she met anold woman who guided her on her way to the Ghost Mountain. And whothis old woman was none could discover, but Galazi swore afterwardsthat she was the Stone Witch of the mountain, who put on the shape ofan aged woman to guide Nada to Umslopogaas, to be the sorrow and thejoy of the People of the Axe. I do not know, my father, yet it seemsto me that the old witch would scarcely have put off her stone for sosmall a matter.

　　Now, when Nada had made an end of her tale, Umslopogaas told his, ofhow things had gone with Dingaan. When he told her how he had giventhe body of the girl to the king, saying that it was the Lily's stalk,she said it had been well done; and when he spoke of the slaying ofthe traitor she clapped her hands, though Nada, whose heart wasgentle, did not love to hear of deeds of death. At last he finished,and she was somewhat sad, and said it seemed that her fate followedher, and that now the People of the Axe were in danger at the hands ofDingaan because of her.

　　"Ah! my brother," she cried, taking Umslopogaas by the hand, "it werebetter I should die than that I should bring evil upon you also."

　　"That would not mend matters, Nada," he answered. "For whether you bedead or alive, the hate of Dingaan. Also, Nada, know this: I am notyour brother."

　　When the Lily heard these words she uttered a little cry, and, lettingfall the hand of Umslopogaas, clasped mine, shrinking up against me.

　　"What is this tale, father?" she asked. "He who was my twin, he withwhom I have been bred up, says that he has deceived me these manyyears, that he is not my brother; who, then, is he, father?"

　　"He is your cousin, Nada."

　　"Ah," she answered, "I am glad. It would have grieved me had he whom Iloved been shown to be but a stranger in whom I have no part," and shesmiled a little in the eyes and at the corners of her mouth. "But tellme this tale also."

　　So I told her the tale of the birth of Umslopogaas, for I trusted her.

　　"Ah," she said, when I had finished, "ah! you come of a bad stock,Umslopogaas, though it is a kingly one. I shall love you littlehenceforth, child of the hyena man."

　　"Then that is bad news," said Umslopogaas, "for know, Nada, I desirenow that you should love me more than ever--that you should be my wifeand love me as your husband!"

　　Now the Lily's face grew sad and sweet, and all the hidden mockerywent out of her talk--for Nada loved to mock.

　　"Did you not speak to me on that night in the Halakazi caves,Umslopogaas, of one Zinita, who is your wife, and Inkosikaas of thePeople of the Axe?"

　　Then the brow of Umslopogaas darkened: "What of Zinita?" he said. "Itis true she is my chieftainess; is it not allowed a man to take morethan one wife?"

　　"So I trust," answered Nada, smiling, "else men would go unwed forlong, for few maids would marry them who then must labour alone alltheir days. But, Umslopogaas, if there are twenty wives, yet one mustbe first. Now this has come about hitherto: that wherever I have beenit has been thrust upon me to be first, and perhaps it might be thusonce more--what then, Umslopogaas?"

　　"Let the fruit ripen before you pluck it, Nada," he answered. "If youlove me and will wed me, it is enough."

　　"I pray that it may not be more than enough," she said, stretching outher hand to him. "Listen, Umslopogaas: ask my father here what werethe words I spoke to him many years ago, before I was a woman, when,with my mother, Macropha, I left him to go among the Swazi people. Itwas after you had been borne away by the lion, Umslopogaas, I told myfather that I would marry no man all my life, because I loved onlyyou, who were dead. My father reproached me, saying that I must notspeak thus of my brother, but it was my heart which spoke, and itspoke truly; for see, Umslopogaas, you are no brother to me! I havekept that vow. How many men have sort me in wedlock since I became awoman, Umslopogaas? I tell you that they are as the leaves upon atree. Yet I have given myself to none, and this has been my fortune:that none have sought to constrain me to marriage. Now I have myreward, for he whom I lost is found again, and to him alone I give mylove. Yet, Umslopogaas, beware! Little luck has come to those who haveloved me in the past; no, not even to those who have but sought tolook on me."

　　"I will bear the risk, Nada," the Slaughterer answered, and gatheringher to his great breast he kissed her.

　　Presently she slipped from his arms and bade him begone, for she wasweary and would rest.

　　So he went.

　　CHAPTER XXXI

　　THE WAR OF THE WOMEN

　　Now on the morrow at daybreak, leaving his wolves, Galazi came downfrom the Ghost Mountain and passed through the gates of the kraal.

　　In front of my hut he saw Nada the Lily and saluted her, for eachremembered the other. Then he walked on to the place of assembly andspoke to me.

　　"So the Star of Death has risen on the People of the Axe, Mopo," hesaid. "Was it because of her coming that my grey people howled sostrangely last night? I cannot tell, but I know this, the Star shonefirst on me this morning, and that is my doom. Well, she is fairenough to be the doom of many, Mopo," and he laughed and passed on,swinging the Watcher. But his words troubled me, though they werefoolish; for I could not but remember that wherever the beauty of Nadahad pleased the sight of men, there men had been given to death.

　　Then I went to lead Nada to the place of assembly and found herawaiting me. She was dressed now in some woman's garments that I hadbrought her; her curling hair fell upon her shoulders; on her wristand neck and knee were bracelets of ivory, and in her hand she bore alily bloom which she had gathered as she went to bathe in the river.Perhaps she did this, my father, because she wished here, aselsewhere, to be known as the Lily, and it is the Zulu fashion to namepeople from some such trifle. But who can know a woman's reason, orwhether a thing is by chance alone, my father? Also she had begged meof a cape I had; it was cunningly made by Basutus, of the whitestfeathers of the ostrich; this she put about her shoulders, and it hungdown to her middle. It had been a custom with Nada from childhood notto go about as do other girls, naked except for their girdles, for shewould always find some rag or skin to lie upon her breast. Perhaps itwas because her skin was fairer than that of other women, or perhapsbecause she knew that she who hides her beauty often seems theloveliest, or because there was truth in the tale of her white bloodand the fashion came to her with the blood. I do not know, my father;at the least she did so.

　　Now I took Nada by the hand and led her through the morning air to theplace of assembly, and ah! she was sweeter than the air and fairerthan the dawn.

　　There were many people in the place of assembly, for it was the day ofthe monthly meeting of the council of the headmen, and there also wereall the women of the kraal, and at their head stood Zinita. Now it hadgot about that the girl whom the Slaughterer went to seek in the cavesof the Halakazi had come to the kraal of the People of the Axe, andall eyes watched for her.

　　"Wow!" said the men as she passed smiling, looking neither to theright nor to the left, yet seeing all--"Wow! but this flower is fair!Little wonder that the Halakazi died for her!"

　　The women looked also, but they said nothing of the beauty of Nada;they scarcely seemed to see it.

　　"That is she for whose sake so many of our people lie unburied," saidone.

　　"Where, then, does she find her fine clothes?" quoth another, "she whocame here last night a footsore wanderer?"

　　"Feathers are not enough for her: look! she must bear flowers also.Surely they are fitter to her hands than the handle of a hoe," said athird.

　　"Now I think that the chief of the People of the Axe will find one toworship above the axe, and that some will be left mourning," put in afourth, glancing at Zinita and the other women of the household of theSlaughterer.

　　Thus they spoke, throwing words like assegais, and Nada heard themall, and knew their meaning, but she never ceased from smiling. OnlyZinita said nothing, but stood looking at Nada from beneath her bentbrows, while by one hand she held the little daughter of Umslopogaas,her child, and with the other played with the beads about her neck.Presently, we passed her, and Nada, knowing well who this must be,turned her eyes full upon the angry eyes of Zinita, and held themthere awhile. Now what there was in the glance of Nada I cannot say,but I know that Zinita, who was afraid of few things, found somethingto fear in it. At the least, it was she who turned her head away, andthe Lily passed on smiling, and greeted Umslopogaas with a little nod.

　　"Hail, Nada!" said the Slaughterer. Then he turned to his headmen andspoke: "This is she whom we went to the caves of the Halakazi to seekfor Dingaan. Ou! the story is known now; one told it up at the kraalUmgugundhlovu who shall tell it no more. She prayed me to save herfrom Dingaan, and so I did, and all would have gone well had it notbeen for a certain traitor who is done with, for I took another toDingaan. Look on her now, my friends, and say if I did not well to winher--the Lily flower, such as there is no other in the world, to bethe joy of the People of the Axe and a wife to me."

　　With one accord the headmen answered: "Indeed you did well,Slaughterer," for the glamour of Nada was upon them and they wouldcherish her as others had cherished her. Only Galazi the Wolf shookhis head. But he said nothing, for words do not avail against fate.Now as I found afterwards, since Zinita, the head wife of Umslopogaas,had learned of what stock he was, she had known that Nada was nosister to him. Yet when she heard him declare that he was about totake the Lily to wife she turned upon him, saying:--

　　"How can this be, Lord?"

　　"Why do you ask, Zinita?" he answered. "Is it not allowed to a man totake another wife if he will?"

　　"Surely, Lord," she said; "but men do not wed their sisters, and Ihave heard that it was because this Nada was your sister that yousaved her from Dingaan, and brought the wrath of Dingaan upon thePeople of the Axe, the wrath that shall destroy them."

　　"So I thought then, Zinita," he answered; "now I know otherwise. Nadais daughter to Mopo yonder indeed, but he is no father to me, thoughhe has been named so, nor was the mother of Nada my mother. That isso, Councillors."

　　Then Zinita looked at me and muttered, "O fool of a Mouth, not fornothing did I fear evil at your hands."

　　I heard the words and took no note, and she poke again to Umslopogaas,saying: "Here is a mystery, O Lord Bulalio. Will it then please you todeclare to us who is your father?"

　　"I have no father," he answered, waxing wroth; "the heavens above aremy father. I am born of Blood and Fire, and she, the Lily, is born ofBeauty to be my mate. Now, woman, be silent." He thought awhile, andadded, "Nay, if you will know, my father was Indabazimbi the Witch-finder, the smeller-out of the king, the son of Arpi." ThisUmslopogaas said at a hazard, since, having denied me, he must declarea father, and dared not name the Black One who was gone. But in afteryears the saying was taken up in the land, and it was told thatUmslopogaas was the son of Indabazimbi the Witch-finder, who had longago fled the land; nor did he deny it. For when all this game had beenplayed out he would not have it known that he was the son of Chaka, hewho no longer sought to be a king, lest he should bring down the wrathof Panda upon him.

　　When the people heard this they thought that Umslopogaas mockedZinita, and yet in his anger he spoke truth when he said first that hewas born of the "heavens above," for so we Zulus name the king, and sothe witch-doctor Indabazimbi named Chaka on the day of the greatsmelling out. But they did not take it in this sense. They held thathe spoke truly when he gave it out that he was born of Indabazimbi theWitch-doctor, who had fled the land, whither I do not know.

　　Then Nada turned to Zinita and spoke to her in a sweet and gentlevoice: "If I am not sister to Bulalio, yet I shall soon be sister toyou who are the Chief's Inkosikaas, Zinita. Shall that not satisfyyou, and will you not greet me kindly and with a kiss of peace, whohave come from far to be your sister, Zinita?" and Nada held out herhands towards her, though whether she did this from the heart orbecause she would put herself in the right before the people I do notknow. But Zinita scowled, and jerked at her necklace of beads,breaking the string on which they were threaded, so that the beadsrolled upon the black earthen floor this way and that.

　　"Keep your kisses for our lord, girl," Zinita said roughly. "As mybeads are scattered so shall you scatter this People of the Axe."

　　Now Nada turned away with a little sigh, and the people murmured, forthey thought that Zinita had treated her badly. Then she stretched outher hand again, and gave the lily in it to Umslopogaas, saying:--

　　"Here is a token of our betrothal, Lord, for never a head of cattlehave my father and I to send--we who are outcasts; and, indeed, thebridegroom must pay the cattle. May I bring you peace and love, myLord!"

　　Umslopogaas took the flower, and looked somewhat foolish with it--hewho was wont to carry the axe, and not a flower; and so that talk wasended.

　　Now as it chanced, this was that day of the year when, according toancient custom, the Holder of the Axe must challenge all and sundry tocome up against him to fight in single combat for Groan-Maker and thechieftainship of the people. Therefore, when the talk was done,Umslopogaas rose and went through the challenge, not thinking that anywould answer him, since for some years none had dared to stand beforehis might. Yet three men stepped forward, and of these two werecaptains, and men whom the Slaughterer loved. With all the people, helooked at them astonished.

　　"How is this?" he said in a low voice to that captain who was nearestand who would do battle with him.

　　For answer the man pointed to the Lily, who stood by. Then Umslopogaasunderstood that because of the medicine of Nada's beauty all mendesired to win her, and, since he who could win the axe would take heralso, he must look to fight with many. Well, fight he must or beshamed.

　　Of the fray there is little to tell. Umslopogaas killed first one manand then the other, and swiftly, for, growing fearful, the third didnot come up against him.

　　"Ah!" said Galazi, who watched, "what did I tell you, Mopo? The cursebegins to work. Death walks ever with that daughter of yours, oldman."

　　"I fear so," I answered, "and yet the maiden is fair and good andsweet."

　　"That will not mend matters," said Galazi.

　　Now on that day Umslopogaas took Nada the Lily to wife, and for awhilethere was peace and quiet. But this evil thing came upon Umslopogaas,that, from the day when he wedded Nada, he hated even to look uponZinita, and not at her alone, but on all his other wives also. Galazisaid it was because Nada had bewitched him, but I know well that theonly witcheries she used were the medicine of her eyes, her beauty,and her love. Still, it came to pass that henceforward, and until shehad long been dead, the Slaughterer loved her, and her alone, and thatis a strange sickness to come upon a man.

　　As may be guessed, my father, Zinita and the other women took thisill. They waited awhile, indeed, thinking that it would wear away,then they began to murmur, both to their husband and in the ears ofother people, till at length there were two parties in the town, theparty of Zinita and the party of Nada.

　　The party of Zinita was made up of women and of certain men who lovedand feared their wives, but that of Nada was the greatest, and it wasall of men, with Umslopogaas at the head of them, and from thisdivision came much bitterness abroad, and quarrelling in the huts. Yetneither the Lily nor Umslopogaas heeded it greatly, nor indeed,anything, so lost and well content were they in each other's love.

　　Now on a certain morning, after they had been married three fullmoons, Nada came from her husband's hut when the sun was already high,and went down through the rock gully to the river to bathe. On theright of the path to the river lay the mealie-fields of the chief, andin them laboured Zinita and the other women of Umslopogaas, weedingthe mealie-plants. They looked up and saw Nada pass, then worked onsullenly. After awhile they saw her come again fresh from the bath,very fair to see, and having flowers twined among her hair, and as shewalked she sang a song of love. Now Zinita cast down her hoe.

　　"Is this to be borne, my sisters?" she said.

　　"No," answered another, "it is not to be borne. What shall we do--shall we fall upon her and kill her now?"

　　"It would be more just to kill Bulalio, our lord," answered Zinita."Nada is but a woman, and, after the fashion of us women, takes allthat she can gather. But he is a man and a chief, and should knowwisdom and justice."

　　"She has bewitched him with her beauty. Let us kill her," said theother women.

　　"Nay," answered Zinita, "I will speak with her," and she went andstood in the path along which the Lily walked singing, her arms foldedacross her breast.

　　Now Nada saw her and, ceasing her song, stretched out her hand towelcome her, saying, "Greeting, sister." But Zinita did not take it."It is not fitting, sister," she said, "that my hand, stained withtoil, should defile yours, fresh with the scent of flowers. But I amcharged with a message, on my own behalf and the behalf of the otherwives of our Lord Bulalio; the weeds grow thick in yonder corn, and wewomen are few; now that your love days are over, will not you come andhelp us? If you brought no hoe from your Swazi home, surely we willbuy you one."

　　Now Nada saw what was meant, and the blood poured to her head. Yet sheanswered calmly:--

　　"I would willingly do this, my sister, though I have never laboured inthe fields, for wherever I have dwelt the men have kept me back fromall work, save such as the weaving of flowers or the stringing ofbeads. But there is this against it--Umslopogaas, my husband, chargedme that I should not toil with my hands, and I may not disobey myhusband."

　　"Our husband charged you so, Nada? Nay, then it is strange. See, now,I am his head wife, his Inkosikaas--it was I who taught him how to winthe axe. Yet he has laid no command on me that I should not labour inthe fields after the fashion of women, I who have borne him children;nor, indeed, has he laid such a command upon any of our sisters, hisother wives. Can it then be that Bulalio loves you better than us,Nada?"

　　Now the Lily was in a trap, and she knew it. So she grew bold.

　　"One must be most loved, Zinita," she said, "as one must be most fair.You have had your hour, leave me mine; perhaps it will be short.Moreover this: Umslopogaas and I loved each other much long yearsbefore you or any of his wives saw him, and we love each other to theend. There is no more to say."

　　"Nay, Nada, there is still something to say; there is this to say:Choose one of two things. Go and leave us to be happy with our lord,or stay and bring death on all."

　　Now Nada thought awhile, and answered: "Did I believe that my lovewould bring death on him I love, it might well chance that I would goand leave him, though to do so would be to die. But, Zinita, I do notbelieve it. Death chiefly loves the weak, and if he falls it will beon the Flower, not on the Slayer of Men," and she slipped past Zinitaand went on, singing no more.

　　Zinita watched her till she was over the ridge, and her face grew evilas she watched. Then she returned to the women.

　　"The Lily flouts us all, my sisters," she said. "Now listen: mycounsel is that we declare a feast of women to be held at the new moonin a secret place far away. All the women and the children shall cometo it except Nada, who will not leave her lover, and if there be anyman whom a woman loves, perhaps, my sisters, that man would do well togo on a journey about the time of the new moon, for evil things mayhappen at the town of the People of the Axe while we are awaycelebrating our feast."

　　"What, then, shall befall, my sister?" asked one.

　　"Nay, how can I tell?" she answered. "I only know that we are mindedto be rid of Nada, and thus to be avenged on a man who has scorned ourlove--ay, and on those men who follow after the beauty of Nada. Is itnot so, my sisters?"

　　"It is so," they answered.

　　"Then be silent on the matter, and let us give out our feast."

　　Now Nada told Umslopogaas of those words which she had bandied withZinita, and the Slaughterer was troubled. Yet, because of hisfoolishness and of the medicine of Nada's eyes, he would not turn fromhis way, and was ever at her side, thinking of little else except ofher. Thus, when Zinita came to him, and asked leave to declare a feastof women that should be held far away, he consented, and gladly, for,above all things, he desired to be free from Zinita and her angrylooks for awhile; nor did he suspect a plot. Only he told her thatNada should not go to the feast; and in a breath both Zinita and Nadaanswered that is word was their will, as indeed it was, in thismatter.

　　Now I, Mopo, saw the glamour that had fallen upon my fosterling, andspoke of it with Galazi, saying that a means must be found to wakehim. Then I took Galazi fully into my mind, and told him all that hedid not know of Umslopogaas, and that was little. Also, I told him ofmy plans to bring the Slaughterer to the throne, and of what I haddone to that end, and of what I proposed to do, and this was to go inperson on a journey to certain of the great chiefs and win them over.

　　Galazi listened, and said that it was well or ill, as the chance mightbe. For his part, he believed that the daughter would pull down fasterthan I, the father, could build up, and he pointed to Nada, who walkedpast us, following Umslopogaas.

　　Yet I determined to go, and that was on the day before Zinita wonleave to celebrate the feast of women. So I sought Umslopogaas andtold him, and he listened indifferently, for he would be going afterNada, and wearied of my talk of policy. I bade him farewell and lefthim; to Nada also I bade farewell. She kissed me, yet the name of herhusband was mingled with her good-bye.

　　"Now madness has come upon these two," I said to myself. "Well, itwill wear off, they will be changed before I come again."

　　I guessed little, my father, how changed they would be.

　　CHAPTER XXXII

　　ZINITA COMES TO THE KING

　　Dingaan the king sat upon a day in the kraal Umgugundhlovu, waitingtill his impis should return from the Income that is now named theBlood River. He had sent them thither to destroy the laager of theBoers, and thence, as he thought, they would presently return withvictory. Idly he sat in the kraal, watching the vultures wheel abovethe Hill of Slaughter, and round him stood a regiment.

　　"My birds are hungry," he said to a councillor.

　　"Doubtless there shall soon be meat to feed them, O King!" thecouncillor answered.

　　As he spoke one came near, saying that a woman sought leave to speakto the king upon some great matter.

　　"Let her come," he answered; "I am sick for tidings, perhaps she cantell of the impi."

　　Presently the woman was led in. She was tall and fair, and she heldtwo children by the hand.

　　"What is thine errand?" asked Dingaan.

　　"Justice, O King," she answered.

　　"Ask for blood, it shall be easier to find."

　　"I ask blood, O King."

　　"The blood of whom?"

　　"The blood of Bulalio the Slaughterer, Chief of the People of the Axe,the blood of Nada the Lily, and of all those who cling to her."

　　Now Dingaan sprang up and swore an oath by the head of the Black Onewho was gone.

　　"What?" he cried, "does the Lily, then, live as the soldier thought?"

　　"She lives, O King. She is wife to the Slaughterer, and because of herwitchcraft he has put me, his first wife, away against all law andhonour. Therefore I ask vengeance on the witch and vengeance also onhim who was my husband."

　　"Thou art a good wife," said the king. "May my watching spirit save mefrom such a one. Hearken! I would gladly grant thy desire, for I, too,hate this Slaughterer, and I, too, would crush this Lily. Yet, woman,thou comest in a bad hour. Here I have but one regiment, and I thinkthat the Slaughterer may take some killing. Wait till my impis returnfrom wiping out the white Amaboona, and it shall be as thou dostdesire. Whose are those children?"

　　"They are my children and the children of Bulalio, who was myhusband."

　　"The children of him whom thou wouldst cause to be slain."

　　"Yea, King."

　　"Surely, woman, thou art as good a mother as wife!" said Dingaan. "NowI have spoken--begone!"

　　But the heart of Zinita was hungry for vengeance, vengeance swift andterrible, on the Lily, who lay in her place, and on her husband, whohad thrust her aside for the Lily's sake. She did not desire to wait--no, not even for an hour.

　　"Hearken, O King!" she cried, "the tale is not yet all told. This man,Bulalio, plots against thy throne with Mopo, son of Makedama, who wasthy councillor."

　　"He plots against my throne, woman? The lizard plots against the cliffon which it suns itself? Then let him plot; and as for Mopo, I willcatch him yet!"

　　"Yes, O King! but that is not all the tale. This man has another name--he is named Umslopogaas, son of Mopo. But he is no son of Mopo: heis son to the Black One who is dead, the mighty king who was thybrother, by Baleka, sister to Mopo. Yes, I know it from the lips ofMopo. I know all the tale. He is heir to thy throne by blood, O King,and thou sittest in his place."

　　For a little while Dingaan sat astounded. Then he commanded Zinita todraw near and tell him that tale.

　　Now behind the stool on which he sat stood two councillors, nobleswhom Dingaan loved, and these alone had heard the last words ofZinita. He bade these nobles stand in front of him, out of earshot andaway from every other man. Then Zinita drew near, and told Dingaan thetale of the birth of Umslopogaas and all that followed, and, by many atoken and many a deed of Chaka's which he remembered, Dingaan the kingknew that it was a true story.

　　When at length she had done, he summoned the captain of the regimentthat stood around: he was a great man named Faku, and he also summonedcertain men who do the king's bidding. To the captain of the impi hespoke sharply, saying:--

　　"Take three companies and guides, and come by night to the town of thePeople of the Axe, that is by Ghost Mountain, and burn it, and slayall the wizards who sleep therein. Most of all, slay the Chief of thePeople, who is named Bulalio the Slaughterer or Umslopogaas. Kill himby torture if you may, but kill him and bring his head to me. Takethat wife of his, who is known as Nada the Lily, alive if ye can, andbring her to me, for I would cause her to be slain here. Bring thecattle also. Now go, and go swiftly, this hour. If ye return havingfailed in one jot of my command, ye die, every one of you--ye die, andslowly. Begone!"

　　The captain saluted, and, running to his regiment, issued a command.Three full companies leapt forward at his word, and ran after himthrough the gates of the kraal Umgugundhlovu, heading for the GhostMountain.

　　Then Dingaan called to those who do the king's bidding, and, pointingto the two nobles, his councillors, who had heard the words of Zinita,commanded that they should be killed.

　　The nobles heard, and, having saluted the king, covered their faces,knowing that they must die because they had learned too much. So theywere killed. Now it was one of these councillors who had said thatdoubtless meat would soon be found to feed the king's birds.

　　Then the king commanded those who do his bidding that they should takethe children of Zinita and make away with them.

　　But when Zinita heard this she cried aloud, for she loved herchildren. Then Dingaan mocked her.

　　"What?" he said, "art thou a fool as well as wicked? Thou sayest thatthy husband, whom thou hast given to death, is born of one who isdead, and is heir to my throne. Thou sayest also that these childrenare born of him; therefore, when he is dead, they will be heirs to mythrone. Am I then mad that I should suffer them to live? Woman, thouhast fallen into thine own trap. Take them away!"

　　Now Zinita tasted of the cup which she had brewed for other lips, andgrew distraught in her misery, and wrung her hands, crying that sherepented her of the evil and would warn Umslopogaas and the Lily ofthat which awaited them. And she turned to run towards the gates. Butthe king laughed and nodded, and they brought her back, and presentlyshe was dead also.

　　Thus, then, my father, prospered the wickedness of Zinita, the headwife of Umslopogaas, my fosterling.

　　Now these were the last slayings that were wrought at the kraalUmgugundhlovu, for just as Dingaan had made an end of them and oncemore grew weary, he lifted his eyes and saw the hillsides black withmen, who by their dress were of his own impi--men whom he had sent outagainst the Boers.

　　And yet where was the proud array, where the plumes and shields, wherethe song of victory? Here, indeed, were soldiers, but they walked ingroups like women and hung their heads like chidden children.

　　Then he learned the truth. The impi had been defeated by the banks ofthe Income; thousands had perished at the laager, mowed down by theguns of the Boers, thousands more had been drowned in the Income, tillthe waters were red and the bodies of the slain pushed each otherunder, and those who still lived walked upon them.

　　Dingaan heard, and was seized with fear, for it was said that theAmaboona followed fast on the track of the conquered.

　　That day he fled to the bush on the Black Umfolozi river, and thatnight the sky was crimson with the burning of the kraal Umgugundhlovu,where the Elephant should trumpet no more, and the vultures werescared from the Hill of Slaughter by the roaring of the flames.

　　*       *       *       *       *

　　Galazi sat on the lap of the stone Witch, gazing towards the wideplains below, that were yet white with the moon, though the night grewtowards the morning. Greysnout whined at his side, and Deathgripthrust his muzzle into his hand; but Galazi took no heed, for he wasbrooding on the fall of Umslopogaas from the man that he had been tothe level of a woman's slave, and on the breaking up of the People ofthe Axe, because of the coming of Nada. For all the women and thechildren were gone to this Feast of Women, and would not return forlong, and it seemed to Galazi that many of the men had slipped awayalso, as though they smelt some danger from afar.

　　"Ah, Deathgrip," said Galazi aloud to the wild brute at his side,"changed is the Wolf King my brother, all changed because of a woman'skiss. Now he hunts no more, no more shall Groan-Maker be aloft; it isa woman's kiss he craves, not the touch of your rough tongue, it is awoman's hand he holds, not the smooth haft of horn, he, who of allmen, was the fiercest and the first; for this last shame has overtakenhim. Surely Chaka was a great king though an evil, and he showed hisgreatness when he forbade marriage to the warriors, marriage thatmakes the heart soft and turns blood to water."

　　Now Galazi ceased, and gazed idly towards the kraal of the People ofthe Axe, and as he looked his eyes caught a gleam of light that seemedto travel in and out of the edge of the shadow of Ghost Mountain as awoman's needle travels through a skin, now seen and now lost in theskin.

　　He started and watched. Ah! there the light came out from the shadow.Now, by Chaka's head, it was the light of spears!

　　One moment more Galazi watched. It was a little impi, perhaps theynumbered two hundred men, running silently, but not to battle, forthey wore no plumes. Yet they went out to kill, for they ran incompanies, and each man carried assegais and a shield.

　　Now Galazi had heard tell of such impis that hunt by night, and heknew well that these were the king's dogs, and their game was men, abig kraal of sleeping men, otherwise there had been fewer dogs. Is awhole pack sent out to catch an antelope on its form? Galazi wonderedwhom they sought. Ah! now they turned to the ford, and he knew. It washis brother Umslopogaas and Nada the Lily and the People of the Axe.These were the king's dogs, and Zinita had let them slip. For thisreason she had called a feast of women, and taken the children withher; for this reason so many had been summoned from the kraal by onemeans or another: it was that they might escape the slaughter.

　　Galazi bounded to his feet. For one moment he thought. Might not thesehunters be hunted? Could he not destroy them by the jaws of the wolvesas once before they had destroyed a certain impi of the king's? Ay, ifhe had seen them but one hour before, then scarcely a man of themshould have lived to reach the stream, for he would have waylaid themwith his wolves. But now it might not be; the soldiers neared theford, and Galazi knew well that his grey people would not hunt on thefurther plain, though for this he had heard one reason only, thatwhich was given him by the lips of the dead in a dream.

　　What, then, might be done? One thing alone: warn Umslopogaas. Yet how?For him who could swim a rushing river, there was, indeed, a swifterway to the place of the People of the Axe--a way that was to the pathof the impi as is the bow-string to the strung bow. And yet they hadtravelled well-nigh half the length of the bow. Still, he might do it,he whose feet were the swiftest in the land, except those ofUmslopogaas. At the least, he would try. Mayhap, the impi would tarryto drink at the ford.

　　So Galazi thought in his heart, and his thought was swift as thelight. Then with a bound he was away down the mountain side. Fromboulder to boulder he leapt like a buck, he crashed through the brakelike a bull, he skimmed the level like a swallow. The mountain wastravelled now; there in front of him lay the yellow river foaming inits flood, so he had swum it before when he went to see the dead. Ah!a good leap far out into the torrent; it was strong, but he breastedit. He was through, he stood upon the bank shaking the water from himlike a dog, and now he was away up the narrow gorge of stones to thelong slope, running low as his wolves ran.

　　Before him lay the town--one side shone silver with the sinking moon,one was grey with the breaking dawn. Ah! they were there, he saw themmoving through the grass by the eastern gate; he saw the long lines ofslayers creep to the left and the right.

　　How could he pass them before the circle of death was drawn? Sixspear-throws to run, and they had but such a little way! The mealie-plants were tall, and at a spot they almost touched the fence. Up thepath! Could Umslopogaas, his brother, move more fast, he wondered,than the Wolf who sped to save him? He was there, hidden by the mealiestalks, and there, along the fence to the right and to the left, theslayers crept!

　　"Wow! What was that?" said one soldier of the king to another man asthey joined their guard completing the death circle. "Wow! somethinggreat and black crashed through the fence before me."

　　"I heard it, brother," answered the other man. "I heard it, but I sawnothing. It must have been a dog: no man could leap so high."

　　"More like a wolf," said the first; "at the least, let us pray that itwas not an Esedowan[1] who will put us into the hole in its back. Isyour fire ready, brother? Wow! these wizards shall wake warm; thesignal should be soon."

　　[1] A fabulous animal, reported by the Zulus to carry off human beingsin a hole in its back.

　　Then arose the sound of a great voice crying, "Awake, ye sleepers, thefoe is at your gates!"

　　CHAPTER XXXIII

　　THE END OF THE PEOPLE, BLACK AND GREY

　　Galazi rushed through the town crying aloud, and behind him rose astir of men. All slept and no sentinels were set, for Umslopogaas wasso lost in his love for Lily that he forgot his wisdom, and thought nomore of war or death or of the hate of Dingaan. Presently the Wolfcame to the large new hut which Umslopogaas had caused to be built forNada the Lily, and entered it, for there he knew that he should findhis brother Bulalio. On the far side of the hut the two lay sleeping,and the head of Umslopogaas rested on the Lily's breast, and by hisside gleamed the great axe Groan-Maker.

　　"Awake!" cried the Wolf.

　　Now Umslopogaas sprang to his feet grasping at his axe, but Nada threwher arms wide, murmuring; "Let me sleep on, sweet is sleep."

　　"Sound shall ye sleep, anon!" gasped Galazi. "Swift, brother, bind onthe wolf's hide, take shield! Swift, I say--for the Slayers of theking are at your gates!"

　　Now Nada sprang up also, and they did his bidding like people in adream; and, while they found their garments and a shield, Galazi tookbeer and drank it, and got his breath again. They stood without thehut. Now the heaven was grey, and east and west and north and southtongues of flame shot up against the sky, for the town had been firedby the Slayers.

　　Umslopogaas looked and his sense came back to him: he understood."Which way, brother?" he said.

　　"Through the fire and the impi to our Grey People on the mountain,"said Galazi. "There, if we can win it, we shall find succour."

　　"What of my people in the kraal," asked Umslopogaas.

　　"They are not many, brother; the women and the children are gone. Ihave roused the men--most will escape. Hence, ere we burn!"

　　Now they ran towards the fence, and as they went men joined them tothe number of ten, half awakened, fear-stricken, armed--some withspears, some with clubs--and for the most part naked. They sped ontogether towards the fence of the town that was now but a ring offire, Umslopogaas and Galazi in front, each holding the Lily by ahand. They neared the fence--from without came the shouts of theSlayers--lo! it was afire. Nada shrank back in fear, but Umslopogaasand Galazi dragged her on. They rushed at the blazing fence, smitingwith axe and club. It broke before them, they were through but littleharmed. Without were a knot of the Slayers, standing back a smallspace because of the heat of the flames. The Slayers saw them, andcrying, "This is Bulalio, kill the wizard!" sprang towards them withuplifted spears. Now the People of the Axe made a ring round Nada, andin the front of it were Umslopogaas and Galazi. Then they rushed onand met those of the Slayers who stood before them, and the men ofDingaan were swept away and scattered by Groan-Maker and the Watcher,as dust is swept of a wind, as grass is swept by a sickle.

　　They were through with only one man slain, but the cry went up thatthe chief of the wizards and the Lily, his wife, had fled. Then, as itwas these whom he was chiefly charged to kill, the captain called offthe impi from watching for the dwellers in the town, and started inpursuit of Umslopogaas. Now, at this time nearly a hundred men of thePeople of the Axe had been killed and of the Slayers some fifty men,for, having been awakened by the crying of Galazi, the soldiers of theaxe fought bravely, though none saw where his brother stood, and noneknew whither their chief had fled except those ten who went with thebrethren.

　　Meanwhile, the Wolf-Brethren and those with them were well away, andit had been easy for them to escape, who were the swiftest-footed ofany in the land. But the pace of a regiment is the pace of itsslowest-footed soldier, and Nada could not run with the Wolf-Brethren.Yet they made good speed, and were halfway down the gorge that led tothe river before the companies of Dingaan poured into it. Now theycame to the end of it, and the foe was near--this end of the gorge isnarrow, my father, like the neck of a gourd--then Galazi stopped andspoke:--

　　"Halt! ye People of the Axe," he said, "and let us talk awhile withthese who follow till we get our breath again. But you, my brother,pass the river with the Lily in your hand. We will join you in theforest; but if perchance we cannot find you, you know what must bedone: set the Lily in the cave, then return and call up the grey impi.Wow! my brother, I must find you if I may, for if these men of Dingaanhave a mind for sport there shall be such a hunting on the GhostMountain as the old Witch has not seen. Go now, my brother!"

　　"It is not my way to turn and run while others stand and fight,"growled Umslopogaas; "yet, because of Nada, it seems that I must."

　　"Oh! heed me not, my love," said Nada, "I have brought thee sorrow--Iam weary, let me die; kill me and save yourselves!"

　　For answer, Umslopogaas took her by the hand and fled towards theriver; but before he reached it he heard the sounds of the fray, thewar-cry of the Slayers as they poured upon the People of the Axe, thehowl of his brother, the Wolf, when the battle joined--ay, and thecrash of the Watcher as the blow went home.

　　"Well bitten, Wolf!" he said, stopping; "that one shall need no more;oh! that I might"--but again he looked at Nada, and sped on.

　　Now they had leaped into the foaming river, and here it was well thatthe Lily could swim, else both had been lost. But they won through andpassed forward to the mountain's flank. Here they walked on among thetrees till the forest was almost passed, and at length Umslopogaasheard the howling of a wolf.

　　Then he must set Nada on his shoulders and carry her as once Galazihad carried another, for it was death for any except the Wolf-Brethrento walk on the Ghost Mountain when the wolves were awake.

　　Presently the wolves flocked around him, and leaped upon him in joy,glaring with fierce eyes at her who sat upon his shoulders. Nada sawthem, and almost fell from her seat, fainting with fear, for they weremany and dreadful, and when they howled her blood turned to ice.

　　But Umslopogaas cheered her, telling her that these were his dogs withwhom he went out hunting, and with whom he should hunt presently. Atlength they came to the knees of the Old Witch and the entrance to thecave. It was empty except for a wolf or two, for Galazi abode hereseldom now; but when he was on the mountain would sleep in the forest,which was nearer the kraal of his brother the Slaughterer.

　　"Here you must stay, sweet," said Umslopogaas when he had driven outthe wolves. "Here you must rest till this little matter of the Slayersis finished. Would that we had brought food, but we had little time toseek it! See, now I will show you the secret of the stone; thus far Iwill push it, no farther. Now a touch only is needed to send it overthe socket and home; but then they must be two strong men who can pullit back again. Therefore push it no farther except in the utmost need,lest it remain where it fall, whether you will it or not. Have nofear, you are safe here; none know of this place except Galazi, myselfand the wolves, and none shall find it. Now I must be going to findGalazi, if he still lives; if not, to make what play I can against theSlayers, alone with the wolves."

　　Now Nada wept, saying that she feared to be left, and that she shouldnever see him more, and her grief rung his heart. Nevertheless,Umslopogaas kissed her and went, closing the stone after him in thatfashion of which he had spoken. When the stone was shut the cave wasalmost dark, except for a ray of light that entered by a hole littlelarger than a man's hand, that, looked at from within, was on theright of the stone. Nada sat herself so that this ray struck full onher, for she loved light, and without it she would pine as flowers do.There she sat and thought in the darksome cave, and was filled withfear and sorrow. And while she brooded thus, suddenly the ray wentout, and she heard a noise as of some beast that smells at prey. Shelooked, and in the gloom she saw the sharp nose and grinning fangs ofa wolf that were thrust towards her through the little hole.

　　Nada cried aloud in fear, and the fangs were snatched back, butpresently she heard a scratching without the cave, and saw the stoneshake. Then she thought in her foolishness that the wolf knew how toopen the stone, and that he would do this, and devour her, for she hadheard the tale that all these wolves were the ghosts of evil men,having the understanding of men. So, in her fear and folly, she seizedthe rock and dragged on it as Umslopogaas had shown her how to do. Itshook, it slipped over the socket ledge, and rolled home like a pebbledown the mouth of a gourd.

　　"Now I am safe from the wolves," said Nada. "See, I cannot so much asstir the stone from within." And she laughed a little, then ceasedfrom laughing and spoke again. "Yet it would be ill if Umslopogaascame back no more to roll away that rock, for then I should be likeone in a grave--as one who is placed in a grave being yet strong andquick." She shuddered as she thought of it, but presently started upand set her ear to the hole to listen, for from far down the mountainthere rose a mighty howling and a din of men.

　　When Umslopogaas had shut the cave, he moved swiftly down themountain, and with him went certain of the wolves; not all, for he hadnot summoned them. His heart was heavy, for he feared that Galazi wasno more. Also he was mad with rage, and plotted in himself to destroythe Slayers of the king, every man of them; but first he must learnwhat they would do. Presently, as he wended, he heard a long, low howlfar away in the forest; then he rejoiced, for he knew the call--it wasthe call of Galazi, who had escaped the spears of the Slayers.

　　Swiftly he ran, calling in answer. He won the place. There, seated ona stone, resting himself, was Galazi, and round him surged the numbersof the Grey People. Umslopogaas came to him and looked at him, for heseemed somewhat weary. There were flesh wounds on his great breast andarms, the little shield was well-nigh hewn to strips, and the Watchershowed signs of war.

　　"How went it, brother?" asked Umslopogaas.

　　"Not so ill, but all those who stood with me in the way are dead, andwith them a few of the foe. I alone am fled like a coward. They cameon us thrice, but we held them back till the Lily was safe; then, allour men being down, I ran, Umslopogaas, and swam the torrent, for Iwas minded to die here in my own place."

　　Now, though he said little of it, I must tell you, my father, thatGalazi had made a great slaughter there in the neck of the donga.Afterwards I counted the slain, and they were many; the nine men ofthe People of the Axe were hidden in them.

　　"Perhaps it shall be the Slayers who die, brother."

　　"Perhaps, at least, there shall be death for some. Still it is in mymind, Slaughterer, that our brotherhood draws to an end, for the fateof him who bears the Watcher, and which my father foretold, is uponme. If so, farewell. While it lasted our friendship has been good, andits ending shall be good. Moreover, it would have endured for many ayear to come had you not sought, Slaughterer, to make good better, andto complete our joy of fellowship and war with the love of women. Fromthat source flow these ills, as a river from a spring; but so it wasfated. If I fall in this fray may you yet live on to fight in manyanother, and at the last to die gloriously with axe aloft; and may youfind a brisker man and a better Watcher to serve you in your need.Should you fall and I live on, I promise this: I will avenge you tothe last and guard the Lily whom you love, offering her comfort, butno more. Now the foe draws on, they have travelled round about by theford, for they dared not face the torrent, and they cried to me thatthey are sworn to slay us or be slain, as Dingaan, the king,commanded. So the fighting will be of the best, if, indeed, they donot run before the fangs of the Grey People. Now, Chief, speak yourword that I may obey it."

　　Thus Galazi spoke in the circle of the wolves, while Umslopogaasleaned upon his Axe Groan-Maker, and listened to him, ay, and wept ashe listened, for after the Lily and me, Mopo, he loved Galazi mostdearly of all who lived. Then he answered:--

　　"Were it not for one in the cave above, who is helpless and tender, Iwould swear to you, Wolf, that if you fall, on your carcase I willdie; and I do swear that, should you fall, while I live Groan-Makershall be busy from year to year till every man of yonder impi is asyou are. Perchance I did ill, Galazi, when first I hearkened to thewords of Zinita and suffered women to come between us. May we one dayfind a land where there are no women, and war only, for in that landwe shall grow great. But now, at the least, we will make a good end tothis fellowship, and the Grey People shall fight their fill, and theold Witch who sits aloft waiting for the world to die shall smile tosee that fight, if she never smiled before. This is my word: that wefall upon the men of Dingaan twice, once in the glade of the forestwhither they will come presently, and, if we are beaten back, then wemust stand for the last time on the knees of the Witch in front of thecave where Nada is. Say, Wolf, will the Grey Folk fight?"

　　"To the last, brother, so long as one is left to lead them, after thatI do not know! Still they have only fangs to set against spears.Slaughterer, your plan is good. Come, I am rested."

　　So they rose and numbered their flock, and all were there, though itwas not as it had been years ago when first the Wolf-Brethren huntedon Ghost Mountain; for many of the wolves had died by men's spearswhen they harried the kraals of men, and no young were born to them.Then, as once before, the pack was halved, and half, the she-wolves,went with Umslopogaas, and half, the dog-wolves, went with Galazi.

　　Now they passed down the forest paths and hid in the tangle of thethickets at the head of the darksome glen, one on each side of theglen. Here they waited till they heard the footfall of the impi of theking's Slayers, as it came slowly along seeking them. In front of theimpi went two soldiers watching for an ambush, and these two men werethe same who had talked together that dawn when Galazi sprang betweenthem. Now also they spoke as they peered this way and that; then,seeing nothing, stood awhile in the mouth of the glen waiting thecoming of their company; and their words came to the ears ofUmslopogaas.

　　"An awful place this, my brother," said one. "A place full of ghostsand strange sounds, of hands that seem to press us back, and whiningsas of invisible wolves. It is named Ghost Mountain, and well named.Would that the king had found other business for us than the slayingof these sorcerers--for they are sorcerers indeed, and this is thehome of their sorceries. Tell me, brother, what was that which leapedbetween us this morning in the dark! I say it was a wizard. Wow! theyare all wizards. Could any who was but a man have done the deeds whichhe who is named the Wolf wrought down by the river yonder, and thenhave escaped? Had the Axe but stayed with the Club they would haveeaten up our impi."

　　"The Axe had a woman to watch," laughed the other. "Yes, it is truethis is a place of wizards and evil things. Methinks I see the redeyes of the Esedowana glaring at us through the dark of the trees andsmell their smell. Yet these wizards must be caught, for know this, mybrother: if we return to Umgugundhlovu with the king's command undone,then there are stakes hardening in the fire of which we shall tastethe point. If we are all killed in the catching, and some, it seems,are missing already, yet they must be caught. Say, my brother, shallwe draw on? The impi is nigh. Would that Faku, our captain yonder,might find two others to take our place, for in this thicket I hadrather run last than first. Well, here leads the spoor--a wondrousmass of wolf-spoor mixed with the footprints of men; perhaps they aresometimes the one and sometimes the other--who knows, my brother? Itis a land of ghosts and wizards. Let us on! Let us on!"

　　Now all this while the Wolf-Brethren had much ado to keep their peoplequiet, for their mouths watered and their eyes shone at the sight ofthe men, and at length it could be done no more, for with a howl asingle she-wolf rushed from her laid and leapt at the throat of theman who spoke, nor did she miss her grip. Down went wolf and man,rolling together on the ground, and there they killed each other.

　　"The Esedowana! the Esedowana are upon us!" cried the other scout,and, turning, fled towards the impi. But he never reached it, for withfearful howlings the ghost-wolves broke their cover and rushed on himfrom the right and the left, and lo! there was nothing of him leftexcept his spear alone.

　　Now a low cry of fear rose from the impi, and some turned to fly, butFaku, the captain, a great and brave man, shouted to them, "Standfirm, children of the king, stand firm, these are no Esedowana, theseare but the Wolf-Brethren and their pack. What! will ye run from dogs,ye who have laughed at the spears of men? Ring round! Stand fast!"

　　The soldiers heard the voice of their captain, and they obeyed hisvoice, forming a double circle, a ring within a ring. They looked tothe right, there, Groan-Maker aloft, the wolf fangs on his brow, theworn wolf-hide streaming on the wind, Bulalio rushed upon them like astorm, and with him came his red-eyed company. They looked to the left--ah, well they know that mighty Watcher! Have they not heard hisstrokes down by the river, and well they know the giant who wields itlike a wand, the Wolf King, with the strength of ten! Wow! They arehere! See the people black and grey, hear them howl their war-chant!Look how they leap like water--leap in a foam of fangs against thehedge of spears! The circle is broken; Groan-Maker has broken it! Ha!Galazi also is through the double ring; now must men stand back toback or perish!

　　How long did it last? Who can say? Time flies fast when blows fallthick. At length the brethren are beaten back; they break out as theybroke in, and are gone, with such of their wolf-folk as were leftalive. Yet that impi was somewhat the worse, but one-third of thoselived who looked on the sun without the forest; the rest lay smitten,torn, mangled, dead, hidden under the heaps of bodies of wild beasts.

　　"Now this is a battle of evil spirits that live in the shapes ofwolves, and as for the Wolf-Brethren, they are sorcerers of therarest," said Faku the captain, "and such sorcerers I love, for theyfight furiously. Yet I will slay them or be slain. At the least, ifthere be few of us left, the most of the wolves are dead also, and thearms of the wizards grow weary."

　　So he moved forward up the mountain with those of the soldiers whoremained, and all the way the wolves harried them, pulling down a manhere and a man there; but though they heard and saw them cheering ontheir pack the Wolf-Brethren attacked them no more, for they savedtheir strength for the last fight of all.

　　The road was long up the mountain, and the soldiers knew little of thepath, and ever the ghost-wolves harried on their flanks. So it wasevening before they came to the feet of the stone Witch, and began toclimb to the platform of her knees. There, on her knees as it were,they saw the Wolf-Brethren standing side by side, such a pair as werenot elsewhere in the world, and they seemed afire, for the sunset beatupon them, and the wolves crept round their feet, red with blood andfire.

　　"A glorious pair!" quoth great Faku; "would that I fought with themrather than against them! Yet, they must die!" Then he began to climbto the knees of the Witch.

　　Now Umslopogaas glanced up at the stone face of her who sat aloft, andit was alight with the sunset.

　　"Said I not that the old Witch should smile at this fray?" he cried."Lo! she smiles! Up, Galazi, let us spend the remnant of our people onthe foe, and fight this fight out, man to man, with no beast to spoilit! Ho! Blood and Greysnout! ho! Deathgrip! ho! wood-dwellers grey andblack, at them, my children!"

　　The wolves heard; they were few and they were sorry to see, withweariness and wounds, but still they were fierce. With a howl, for thelast time they leaped down upon the foe, tearing, harrying, andkilling till they themselves were dead by the spear, every one of themexcept Deathgrip, who crept back sorely wounded to die with Galazi.

　　"Now I am a chief without a people," cried Galazi. "Well, it has beenmy lot in life. So it was in the Halakazi kraals, so it is on GhostMountain at the last, and so also shall it be even for the greatestkings when they come to their ends, seeing that they, too, must diealone. Say, Slaughterer, choose where you will stand, to the left orto the right."

　　Now, my father, the track below separated, because of a boulder, andthere were two little paths which led to the platform of the Witch'sknees with, perhaps, ten paces between them. Umslopogaas guarded theleft-hand path and Galazi took the right. Then they waited, havingspears in their hands. Presently the soldiers came round the rock andrushed up against them, some on one path and some on the other.

　　Then the brethren hurled their spears at them and killed three men.Now the assegais were done, and the foe was on them. Umslopogaas bendsforward, his long arm shoots out, the axe gleams, and a man who cameon falls back.

　　"One!" cries Umslopogaas.

　　"One, my brother!" answers Galazi, as he draws back the Watcher fromhis blow.

　　A soldier rushes forward, singing. To and fro he moves in front ofUmslopogaas, his spear poised to strike. Groan-Maker swoops down, butthe man leaps back, the blow misses, and the Slaughterer's guard isdown.

　　"A poor stroke, Sorcerer!" cries the man as he rushes in to stab him.Lo! the axe wheels in the air, it circles swiftly low down by theground; it smites upward. Before the spearsman can strike the horn ofGroan-Maker has sped from chin to brain.

　　"But a good return, fool!" says Umslopogaas.

　　"Two!" cries Galazi, from the right.

　　"Two! my brother," answers Umslopogaas.

　　Again two men come on, one against each, to find no better luck. Thecry of "Three!" passes from brother to brother, and after it rises thecry of "Four!"

　　Now Faku bids the men who are left to hold their shields together andpush the two from the mouths of the paths, and this they do, losingfour more men at the hands of the brethren before it is done.

　　"Now we are on the open! Ring them round and down with them!" criesFaku.

　　But who shall ring round Groan-Maker that shines on all sides at once,Groan-Maker who falls heavily no more, but pecks and pecks and peckslike a wood-bird on a tree, and never pecks in vain? Who shall ringround those feet swifter than the Sassaby of the plains? Wow! He ishere! He is there! He is a sorcerer! Death is in his hand, and deathlooks out of his eyes!

　　Galazi lives yet, for still there comes the sound of the Watcher as itthunders on the shields, and the Wolf's hoarse cry of the number ofthe slain. He has a score of wounds, yet he fights on! his leg isalmost hewn from him with an axe, yet he fights on! His back ispierced again and again, yet he fights on! But two are left alivebefore him, one twists round and spears him from behind. He heeds itnot, but smites down the foe in front. Then he turns and, whirling theWatcher on high, brings him down for the last time, and so mightilythat the man before him is crushed like an egg.

　　Galazi brushes the blood from his eyes and glares round on the dead."All! Slaughterer," he cries.

　　"All save two, my brother," comes the answer, sounding above the clashof steel and the sound of smitten shields.

　　Now the Wolf would come to him, but cannot, for his life ebbs.

　　"Fare you well, my brother! Death is good! Thus, indeed, I would die,for I have made me a mat of men to lie on," he cried with a greatvoice.

　　"Fare you well! Sleep softly, Wolf!" came the answer. "All save one!"

　　Now Galazi fell dying on the dead, but he was not altogether gone, forhe still spoke. "All save one! Ha! ha! ill for that one then whenGroan-Maker yet is up. It is well to have lived so to die. Victory!Victory!"

　　And Galazi the Wolf struggled to his knees and for the last time shookthe Watcher about his head, then fell again and died.

　　Umslopogaas, the son of Chaka, and Faku, the captain of Dingaan, gazedon each other. They alone were left standing upon the mountain, forthe rest were all down. Umslopogaas had many wounds. Faku was unhurt;he was a strong man, also armed with an axe.

　　Faku laughed aloud. "So it has come to this, Slaughterer," he said,"that you and I must settle whether the king's word be done or no.Well, I will say that however it should fall out, I count it a greatfortune to have seen this fight, and the highest of honours to havehad to do with two such warriors. Rest you a little, Slaughterer,before we close. That wolf-brother of yours died well, and if it isgiven me to conquer in this bout, I will tell the tale of his end fromkraal to kraal throughout the land, and it shall be a tale forever."

　　CHAPTER XXXIV

　　THE LILY'S FAREWELL

　　Umslopogaas listened, but he made no answer to the words of Faku thecaptain, though he liked them well, for he would not waste his breathin talking, and the light grew low.

　　"I am ready, Man of Dingaan," he said, and lifted his axe.

　　Now for awhile the two circled round and round, each waiting for achance to strike. Presently Faku smote at the head of Umslopogaas, butthe Slaughterer lifted Groan-Maker to ward the blow. Faku crooked hisarm and let the axe curl downwards, so that its keen edge smoteUmslopogaas upon the head, severing his man's ring and the scalpbeneath.

　　Made mad with the pain, the Slaughterer awoke, as it were. He graspedGroan-maker with both hands and struck thrice. The first blow hewedaway the plumes and shield of Faku, and drive him back a spear'slength, the second missed its aim, the third and mightiest twisted inhis wet hands, so that the axe smote sideways. Nevertheless, it fellfull on the breast of the captain Faku, shattering his bones, andsweeping him from the ledge of rock on to the slope beneath, where helay still.

　　"It is finished with the daylight," said Umslopogaas, smiling grimly."Now, Dingaan, send more Slayers to seek your slain," and he turned tofind Nada in the cave.

　　But Faku the captain was not yet dead, though he was hurt to death. Hesat up, and with his last strength he hurled the axe in his hand athim whose might had prevailed against him. The axe sped true, andUmslopogaas did not see it fly. It sped true, and its point struck himon the left temple, driving in the bone and making a great hole. ThenFaku fell back dying, and Umslopogaas threw up his arms and droppedlike an ox drops beneath the blow of the butcher, and lay as one dead,under the shadow of a stone.

　　All day long Nada crouched in the cave listening to the sounds of warthat crept faintly up the mountain side; howling of wolves, shoutingof men, and the clamour of iron on iron. All day long she sat, and nowevening came apace, and the noise of battle drew near, swelled, andsank, and died away. She heard the voices of the Wolf-Brethren as theycalled to each other like bucks, naming the number of the slain. Sheheard Galazi's cry of "Victory!" and her heart leapt to it, though sheknew that there was death in the cry. Then for the last time she heardthe faint ringing of iron on iron, and the light went out and all grewstill.

　　All grew still as the night. There came no more shouting of men and nomore clash of arms, no howlings of wolves, no cries of pain or triumph--all was quiet as death, for death had taken all.

　　For awhile Nada the Lily sat in the dark of the cave, saying toherself, "Presently he will come, my husband, he will surely come; theSlayers are slain--he does not but tarry to bind his wounds; ascratch, perchance, here and there. Yes, he will come, and it is well,for I am weary of my loneliness, and this place is grim and evil."

　　Thus she spoke to herself in hope, but nothing came except thesilence. Then she spoke again, and her voice echoed in the hollowcave. "Now I will be bold, I will fear nothing, I will push aside thestone and go out to find him. I know well he does but linger to tendsome who are wounded, perhaps Galazi. Doubtless Galazi is wounded. Imust go and nurse him, though he never loved me, and I do not love himovermuch who would stand between me and my husband. This wild wolf-manis a foe to women, and, most of all, a foe to me; yet I will be kindto him. Come, I will go at once," and she rose and pushed at the rock.

　　Why, what was this? It did not stir. Then she remembered that she hadpulled it beyond the socket because of her fear of the wolf, and thatthe rock had slipped a little way down the neck of the cave.Umslopogaas had told her that she must not do this, and she hadforgotten his words in her foolishness. Perhaps she could move thestone; no, not by the breadth of a grain of corn. She was shut in,without food or water, and here she must bide till Umslopogaas came.And if he did not come? Then she must surely die.

　　Now she shrieked aloud in her fear, calling on the name ofUmslopogaas. The walls of the cave answered "Umslopogaas!Umslopogaas!" and that was all.

　　Afterwards madness fell upon Nada, my daughter, and she lay in thecave for days and nights, nor knew ever how long she lay. And with hermadness came visions, for she dreamed that the dead One whom Galazihad told her of sat once more aloft in his niche at the end of thecave and spoke to her, saying:--

　　"Galazi is dead! The fate of him who bears the Watcher has fallen onhim. Dead are the ghost-wolves; I also am of hunger in this cave, andas I died so shall you die, Nada the Lily! Nada, Star of Death!because of whose beauty and foolishness all this death has comeabout."

　　This is seemed to Nada, in her madness, that the shadow of him who hadsat in the niche spoke to her from hour to hour.

　　It seemed to Nada, in her madness, that twice the light shone throughthe hole by the rock, and that was day, and twice it went out, andthat was night. A third time the ray shone and died away, and lo! hermadness left her, and she awoke to know that she was dying, and that avoice she loved spoke without the hole, saying in hollow accents:--

　　"Nada? Do you still live, Nada?"

　　"Yea," she answered hoarsely. "Water! give me water!"

　　Next she heard a sound as of a great snake dragging itself alongpainfully. A while passed, then a trembling hand thrust a little gourdof water through the hole. She drank, and now she could speak, thoughthe water seemed to flow through her veins like fire.

　　"Is it indeed you, Umslopogaas?" she said, "or are you dead, and do Idream of you?"

　　"It is I, Nada," said the voice. "Hearken! have you drawn the rockhome?"

　　"Alas! yes," she answered. "Perhaps, if the two of us strive at it, itwill move."

　　"Ay, if our strength were what it was--but now! Still, let us try."

　　So they strove with a rock, but the two of them together had not thestrength of a girl, and it would not stir.

　　"Give over, Umslopogaas," said Nada; "we do but waste the time that isleft to me. Let us talk!"

　　For awhile there was no answer, for Umslopogaas had fainted, and Nadabeat her breast, thinking that he was dead.

　　Presently he spoke, however, saying, "It may not be; we must perishhere, one on each side of the stone, not seeing the other's face, formy might is as water; nor can I stand upon my feet to go and seek forfood."

　　"Are you wounded, Umslopogaas?" asked Nada.

　　"Ay, Nada, I am pierced to the brain with the point of an axe; no fairstroke, the captain of Dingaan hurled it at me when I thought himdead, and I fell. I do not know how long I have lain yonder under theshadow of the rock, but it must be long, for my limbs are wasted, andthose who fell in the fray are picked clean by the vultures, allexcept Galazi, for the old wolf Deathgrip lies on his breast dying,but not dead, licking my brother's wounds, and scares the fowls away.It was the beak of a vulture, who had smelt me out at last, that wokeme from my sleep beneath the stone, Nada, and I crept hither. Wouldthat he had not awakened me, would that I had died as I lay, ratherthan lived a little while till you perish thus, like a trapped fox,Nada, and presently I follow you."

　　"It is hard to die so, Umslopogaas," she answered, "I who am yet youngand fair, who love you, and hoped to give you children; but so it hascome about, and it may not be put away. I am well-nigh sped, husband;horror and fear have conquered me, my strength fails, but I sufferlittle. Let us talk no more of death, let us rather speak of ourchildhood, when we wandered hand in hand; let us talk also of ourlove, and of the happy hours that we have spent since your great axerang upon the rock in the Halakazi caves, and my fear told you thesecret of my womanhood. See, I thrust my hand through the hole; canyou not kiss it, Umslopogaas?"

　　Now Umslopogaas stooped his shattered head, and kissed the Lily'slittle hand, then he held it in his own, and so they sat till the end--he without, resting his back against the rock, she within, lying onher side, her arm stretched through the little hole. They spoke oftheir love, and tried to forget their sorrow in it; he told her alsoof the fray which had been and how it went.

　　"Ah!" she said, "that was Zinita's work, Zinita who hated me, andjustly. Doubtless she set Dingaan on this path."

　　"A little while gone," quoth Umslopogaas; "and I hoped that your lastbreath and mine might pass together, Nada, and that we might gotogether to seek great Galazi, my brother, where he is. Now I hopethat help will find me, and that I may live a little while, because ofa certain vengeance which I would wreak."

　　"Speak not of vengeance, husband," she answered, "I, too, am near tothat land where the Slayer and the Slain, the Shedder of Blood and theAvenger of Blood are lost in the same darkness. I would die with love,and love only, in my heart, and your name, and yours only, on my lips,so that if anywhere we live again it shall be ready to spring forth togreet you. Yet, husband, it is in my heart that you will not go withme, but that you shall live on to die the greatest of deaths far awayfrom here, and because of another woman. It seems that, as I lay inthe dark of this cave, I saw you, Umslopogaas, a great man, gaunt andgrey, stricken to the death, and the axe Groan-maker wavering aloft,and many a man dead upon a white and shimmering way, and about you thefair faces of white women; and you had a hole in your forehead,husband, on the left side."

　　"That is like to be true, if I live," he answered, "for the bone of mytemple is shattered."

　　Now Nada ceased speaking, and for a long while was silent; Umslopogaaswas also silent and torn with pain and sorrow because he must lose theLily thus, and she must die so wretchedly, for one reason only, thatthe cast of Faku had robbed him of his strength. Alas! he who had donemany deeds might not save her now; he could scarcely hold himselfupright against the rock. He thought of it, and the tears flowed downhis face and fell on to the hand of the Lily. She felt them fall andspoke.

　　"Weep not, my husband," she said, "I have been all too ill a wife toyou. Do not mourn for me, yet remember that I loved you well." Andagain she was silent for a long space.

　　Then she spoke and for the last time of all, and her voice came in agasping whisper through the hole in the rock:--

　　"Farewell, Umslopogaas, my husband and my brother, I thank you foryour love, Umslopogaas. Ah! I die!"

　　Umslopogaas could make no answer, only he watched the little hand heheld. Twice it opened, twice it closed upon his own, then it openedfor the third time, turned grey, quivered, and was still forever!

　　Now it was at the hour of dawn that Nada died.

　　CHAPTER XXXV

　　THE VENGEANCE OF MOPO AND HIS FOSTERLING

　　It chanced that on this day of Nada's death and at that same hour ofdawn I, Mopo, came from my mission back to the kraal of the People ofthe Axe, having succeeded in my end, for that great chief whom I hadgone out to visit had hearkened to my words. As the light broke Ireached the town, and lo! it was a blackness and a desolation.

　　"Here is the footmark of Dingaan," I said to myself, and walked to andfro, groaning heavily. Presently I found a knot of men who were of thepeople that had escaped the slaughter, hiding in the mealie-fieldslest the Slayers should return, and from them I drew the story. Ilistened in silence, for, my father, I was grown old in misfortune;then I asked where were the Slayers of the king? They replied thatthey did not know; the soldiers had gone up the Ghost Mountain afterthe Wolf-Brethren and Nada the Lily, and from the forest had come ahowling of beasts and sounds of war; then there was silence, and nonehad been seen to return from the mountain, only all day long thevultures hung over it.

　　"Let us go up the mountain," I said.

　　At first they feared, because of the evil name of the place; but inthe end they came with me, and we followed on the path of the impi ofthe Slayers and guessed all that had befallen it. At length we reachedthe knees of stone, and saw the place of the great fight of the Wolf-Brethren. All those who had taken part in that fight were now butbones, because the vultures had picked them every one, except Galazi,for on the breast of Galazi lay the old wolf Deathgrip, that was yetalive. I drew near the body, and the great wolf struggled to his feetand ran at me with bristling hair and open jaws, from which no soundcame. Then, being spent, he rolled over dead.

　　Now I looked round seeking the axe Groan-Maker among the bones of theslain, and did not find it and the hope came into my heart thatUmslopogaas had escaped the slaughter. Then we went on in silence towhere I knew the cave must be, and there by its mouth lay the body ofa man. I ran to it--it was Umslopogaas, wasted with hunger, and in histemple was a great wound and on his breast and limbs were many otherwounds. Moreover, in his hand he held another hand--a dead hand, thatwas thrust through a hole in the rock. I knew its shape well--it wasthe little hand of my child, Nada the Lily.

　　Now I understood, and, bending down, I felt the heart of Umslopogaas,and laid the down of an eagle upon his lips. His heart still stirredand the down was lifted gently.

　　I bade those with me drag the stone, and they did so with toil. Nowthe light flowed into the cave, and by it we saw the shape of Nada mydaughter. She was somewhat wasted, but still very beautiful in herdeath. I felt her heart also: it was still, and her breast grew cold.

　　Then I spoke: "The dead to the dead. Let us tend the living."

　　So we bore in Umslopogaas, and I caused broth to be made and poured itdown his throat; also I cleansed his great wound and bound healingherbs upon it, plying all my skill. Well I knew the arts of healing,my father; I who was the first of the izinyanga of medicine, and, hadit not been for my craft, Umslopogaas had never lived, for he was verynear his end. Still, there where he had once been nursed by Galazi theWolf, I brought him back to life. It was three days till he spoke,and, before his sense returned to him, I caused a great hole to be dugin the floor of the cave. And there, in the hole, I buried Nada mydaughter, and we heaped lily blooms upon her to keep the earth fromher, and then closed in her grave, for I was not minded thatUmslopogaas should look upon her dead, lest he also should die fromthe sight, and because of his desire to follow her. Also I buriedGalazi the Wolf in the cave, and set the Watcher in his hand, andthere they both sleep who are friends at last, the Lily and the Wolftogether. Ah! when shall there be such another man and such anothermaid?

　　At length on the third day Umslopogaas spoke, asking for Nada. Ipointed to the earth, and he remembered and understood. Thereafter thestrength of Umslopogaas gathered on him slowly, and the hole in hisskull skinned over. But now his hair was grizzled, and he scarcelysmiled again, but grew even more grim and stern than he had beenbefore.

　　Soon we learned all the truth about Zinita, for the women and childrencame back to the town of the People of the Axe, only Zinita and thechildren of Umslopogaas did not come back. Also a spy reached me fromthe Mahlabatine and told me of the end of Zinita and of the flight ofDingaan before the Boers.

　　Now when Umslopogaas had recovered, I asked him what he would do, andwhether or not I should pursue my plots to make him king of the land.

　　But Umslopogaas shook his head, saying that he had no heart that way.He would destroy a king indeed, but now he no longer desired to be aking. He sought revenge alone. I said that it was well, I also soughtvengeance, and seeking together we would find it.

　　Now, my father, there is much more to tell, but shall I tell it? Thesnow has melted, your cattle have been found where I told you theyshould be, and you wish to be gone. And I also, I would be gone upon alonger journey.

　　Listen, my father, I will be short. This came into my mind: to playoff Panda against Dingaan; it was for such an hour of need that I hadsaved Panda alive. After the battle of the Blood River, Dingaansummoned Panda to a hunt. Then it was that I journeyed to the kraal ofPanda on the Lower Tugela, and with me Umslopogaas. I warned Pandathat he should not go to this hunt, for he was the game himself, butthat he should rather fly into Natal with all his people. He did so,and then I opened talk with the Boers, and more especially with thatBoer who was named Ungalunkulu, or Great Arm. I showed the Boer thatDingaan was wicked and not to be believed, but Panda was faithful andgood. The end of it was that the Boers and Panda made war together onDingaan. Yes, I made that war that we might be revenged on Dingaan.Thus, my father, do little things lead to great.

　　Were we at the big fight, the battle of Magongo? Yes, my father; wewere there. When Dingaan's people drove us back, and all seemed lost,it was I who put into the mind of Nongalaza, the general, to pretendto direct the Boers where to attack, for the Amaboona stood out ofthat fight, leaving it to us black people. It was Umslopogaas who cuthis way with Groan-Maker through a wing of one of Dingaan's regimentstill he came to the Boer captain Ungalunkulu, and shouted to him toturn the flank of Dingaan. That finished it, my father, for theyfeared to stand against us both, the white and the black together.They fled, and we followed and slew, and Dingaan ceased to be a king.

　　He ceased to be a king, but he still lived, and while he lived ourvengeance was hungry. So we went to the Boer captain and to Panda, andspoke to them nicely, saying, "We have served you well, we have foughtfor you, and so ordered things that victory is yours. Now grant usthis request, that we may follow Dingaan, who has fled into hiding,and kill him wherever we find him, for he has worked us wrong, and wewould avenge it."

　　Then the white captain and Panda smiled and said, "Go children, andprosper in your search. No one thing shall please us more than to knowthat Dingaan is dead." And they gave us men to go with us.

　　Then we hunted that king week by week as men hunt a wounded buffalo.We hunted him to the jungles of the Umfalozi and through them. But hefled ever, for he knew that the avengers of blood were on his spoor.After that for awhile we lost him. Then we heard that he had crossedthe Pongolo with some of the people who still clung to him. Wefollowed him to the place Kwa Myawo, and there we lay hid in the bushwatching. At last our chance came. Dingaan walked in the bush and withhim two men only. We stabbed the men and seized him.

　　Dingaan looked at us and knew us, and his knees trembled with fear.Then I spoke:--

　　"What was that message which I sent thee, O Dingaan, who art no more aking--that thou didst evil to drive me away, was it not? because I setthee on thy throne and I alone could hold thee there?"

　　He made no answer, and I went on:--

　　"I, Mopo, son of Makedama, set thee on thy throne, O Dingaan, who wasta king, and I, Mopo, have pulled thee down from thy throne. But mymessage did not end there. It said that, ill as thou hadst done todrive me away, yet worse shouldst thou do to look upon my face again,for that day should be thy day of doom."

　　Still he made no answer. Then Umslopogaas spoke:--

　　"I am that Slaughterer, O Dingaan, no more a king, whom thou didstsend Slayers many and fierce to eat up at the kraal of the People ofthe Axe. Where are thy Slayers now, O Dingaan? Before all is done thoushalt look upon them."

　　"Kill me and make an end; it is your hour," said Dingaan.

　　"Not yet awhile, O son of Senzangacona," answered Umslopogaas, "andnot here. There lived a certain woman and she was named Nada the Lily.I was her husband, O Dingaan, and Mopo here, he was her father. But,alas! she died, and sadly--she lingered three days and nights beforeshe died. Thou shalt see the spot and hear the tale, O Dingaan. Itwill wring thy heart, which was ever tender. There lived certainchildren, born of another woman named Zinita, little children, sweetand loving. I was their father, O Elephant in a pit, and one Dingaanslew them. Of them thou shalt hear also. Now away, for the path isfar!"

　　Two days went by, my father, and Dingaan sat bound and alone in thecave on Ghost Mountain. We had dragged him slowly up the mountain, forhe was heavy as an ox. Three men pushing at him and three otherspulling on a cord about his middle, we dragged him up, staying now andagain to show him the bones of those whom he had sent out to kill us,and telling him the tale of that fight.

　　Now at length we were in the cave, and I sent away those who were withus, for we wished to be alone with Dingaan at the last. He sat down onthe floor of the cave, and I told him that beneath the earth on whichhe sat lay the bones of that Nada whom he had murdered and the bonesof Galazi the Wolf.

　　On the third day before the dawn we came again and looked upon him.

　　"Slay me," he said, "for the Ghosts torment me!"

　　"No longer art thou great, O shadow of a king," I said, "who now dosttremble before two Ghosts out of all the thousands that thou hastmade. Say, then, how shall it fare with thee presently when thou artof their number?"

　　Now Dingaan prayed for mercy.

　　"Mercy, thou hyena!" I answered, "thou prayest for mercy who showednone to any! Give me back my daughter. Give this man back his wife andchildren; then we will talk of mercy. Come forth, coward, and die thedeath of cowards."

　　So, my father, we dragged him out, groaning, to the cleft that isabove in the breast of the old Stone Witch, that same cleft whereGalazi had found the bones. There we stood, waiting for the moment ofthe dawn, that hour when Nada had died. Then we cried her name intohis ears and the names of the children of Umslopogaas, and cast himinto the cleft.

　　This was the end of Dingaan, my father--Dingaan, who had the fierceheart of Chaka without its greatness.

　　CHAPTER XXXVI

　　MOPO ENDS HIS TALE

　　That is the tale of Nada the Lily, my father, and of how we avengedher. A sad tale--yes, a sad tale; but all was sad in those days. Itwas otherwise afterwards, when Panda reigned, for Panda was a man ofpeace.

　　There is little more to tell. I left the land where I could stay nolonger who had brought about the deaths of two kings, and came here toNatal to live near where the kraal Duguza once had stood.

　　The bones of Dingaan as they lay in the cleft were the last things myeyes beheld, for after that I became blind, and saw the sun no more,nor any light--why I do not know, perhaps from too much weeping, myfather. So I changed my name, lest a spear might reach the heart thathad planned the death of two kings and a prince--Chaka, Dingaan, andUmhlangana of the blood royal. Silently and by night Umslopogaas, myfosterling, led me across the border, and brought me here to Stanger;and here as an old witch-doctor I have lived for many, many years. Iam rich. Umslopogaas craved back from Panda the cattle of whichDingaan had robbed me, and drove them hither. But none were here whohad lived in the kraal Duguza, none knew, in Zweete the blind oldwitch-doctor, that Mopo who stabbed Chaka, the Lion of the Zulu. Noneknow it now. You have heard the tale, and you alone, my father. Do nottell it again till I am dead.

　　Umslopogaas? Yes, he went back to the People of the Axe and ruledthem, but they were never so strong again as they had been before theysmote the Halakazi in their caves, and Dingaan ate them up. Panda lethim be and liked him well, for Panda did not know that the Slaughtererwas son to Chaka his brother, and Umslopogaas let that dog lie, forwhen Nada died he lost his desire to be great. Yet he became captainof the Nkomabakosi regiment, and fought in many battles, doing mightydeeds, and stood by Umbulazi, son of Panda, in the great fray on theTugela, when Cetywayo slew his brother Umbulazi.

　　After that also he plotted against Cetywayo, whom he hated, and had itnot been for a certain white man, a hunter named Macumazahn,Umslopogaas would have been killed. But the white man saved him by hiswit. Yes, and at times he came to visit me, for he still loved me asof old; but now he has fled north, and I shall hear his voice no more.Nay, I do not know all the tale; there was a woman in it. Women wereever the bane of Umslopogaas, my fostering. I forget the story of thatwoman, for I remember only these things that happened long ago, beforeI grew very old.

　　Look on this right hand of mine, my father! I cannot see it now; andyet I, Mopo, son of Makedama, seem to see it as once I saw, red withthe blood of two kings. Look on--

　　Suddenly the old man ceased, his head fell forward upon his witheredbreast. When the White Man to whom he told this story lifted it andlooked at him, he was dead!

　　End